The Youngstown–Warren–Boardman, OH–PA Metropolitan Statistical Area, typically known as the Mahoning Valley or the Steel Valley, is a metropolitan area in Northeast Ohio and Western Pennsylvania the United States, with the city of Youngstown, Ohio, at its center. According to the US Census Bureau, the metropolitan statistical area (MSA) includes Mahoning and Trumbull counties in Ohio and Mercer County in Pennsylvania. As of the 2020 census, the metro area had a population of 541,243. This area has a large commuter population that works in Cleveland and Pittsburgh and their metropolitan areas. It is located in the Rust Belt, a region which stretches from Minneapolis in the west to Scranton in the east.
Although steel has been produced in the Mahoning Valley since the mid-1800s, after the Civil War, the valley was primarily known for its iron production. Conversion to steel manufacturing began during the economic depression of the 1890s. The Mahoning Valley is suitable for steel manufacture because of "its proximity to the Lake Erie ports that receive iron ore…the coal fields of Ohio, Pennsylvania and West Virginia; and to limestone deposits." The "25-mile stretch of steel mills and related industries" along the Mahoning River is similar to the Ruhr Valley in Germany." Historically, it was the largest steel producing region in the world (including all of Northeast Ohio and Western Pennsylvania).
The local steel industry declined during the 1970s steel crisis. A notable plant closure occurred on September 19, 1977, when Youngstown Sheet and Tube abruptly closed its Campbell Works and furloughed 5,000 workers. Today the area produces little steel, and is home to many scrap metal yards and aluminum plants. A 2009 documentary titled "Steel Valley: Meltdown" describes "the past, present and future of the Mahoning Valley" through the eyes of local experts, including one local organizer who stated, "We are the first generation completely removed from the days when steel mills were active."
The Mahoning Valley Economic Development Corporation, founded in 1979, is active in economic revitalization and diversification. It owns two industrial parks, and has purchased local rail lines, including the Youngstown and Austintown Railroad and the Warren and Trumbull Railroad.




Mahoning County

Alliance (partly in Stark County)
Austintown
Beloit
Berlin Center
Boardman
Campbell
Canfield
Craig Beach
Lowellville
Maple Ridge
Mineral Ridge
New Middletown
Poland
Sebring
Struthers
Youngstown


Trumbull County

Cortland
Girard
Hubbard
Newton Falls
Niles
Warren
Lordstown
McDonald
Orangeville
West Farmington
Yankee Lake


Columbiana County (CSA)

Columbiana
East Liverpool
East Palestine
Hanoverton
Leetonia
Lisbon
Minerva
New Waterford
Rogers
Salem
Salineville
Summitville
Washingtonville
Wellsville


Mercer County

Clark
Farrell
Fredonia
Greenville
Grove City
Hermitage
Jackson Center
Jamestown
Mercer
New Lebanon
Sandy Lake
Sharon
Sharpsville
Sheakleyville
Stoneboro
West Middlesex
Wheatland






Mahoning County

Austintown
Beaver
Berlin
Boardman
Canfield
Coitsville
Ellsworth
Goshen
Green
Jackson
Milton
Poland
Smith
Springfield


Trumbull County

Bazetta
Bloomfield
Braceville
Bristol
Brookfield
Champion
Farmington
Fowler
Greene
Gustavus
Hartford
Howland
Hubbard
Johnston
Kinsman
Liberty
Mecca
Mesopotamia
Newton
Southington
Vernon
Vienna
Warren
Weathersfield


Columbiana County (CSA)

Butler
Center
Elkrun
Fairfield
Franklin
Hanover
Knox
Liverpool
Madison
Middleton
Perry
Salem
St. Clair
Unity
Washington
Wayne
West
Yellow Creek


Mercer County

Coolspring Township
Deer Creek Township
Delaware Township
East Lackawannock Township
Fairview Township
Findley Township
French Creek Township
Greene Township
Hempfield Township
Jackson Township
Lackawannock Township
Lake Township
Liberty Township
Mill Creek Township
New Vernon Township
Otter Creek Township
Perry Township
Pine Township
Pymatuning Township
Salem Township
Sandy Creek Township
Sandy Lake Township
Shenango Township
South Pymatuning Township
Springfield Township
Sugar Grove Township
West Salem Township
Wilmington Township
Wolf Creek Township
Worth Township


As of the census of 2000, there were 602,978 people, 238,319 households, and 162,896 families residing within the MSA. The racial makeup of the MSA was 86.88% White, 10.78% African American, 0.15% Native American, 0.45% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.55% from other races, and 1.17% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.70% of the population.
The median income for a household in the MSA was $36,071, and the median income for a family was $44,055. Males had a median income of $35,626 versus $23,186 for females. The per capita income for the MSA was $18,547.
NCAA Division I sports are played in the region, with Youngstown State University fielding eight men's and ten women's teams.
The Youngstown–Warren combined statistical area is made up of four counties – three in northeast Ohio and one in western Pennsylvania. The statistical area includes one metropolitan area and one micropolitan area. The Youngstown-Warren media market serves all three counties in the CSA, as well as the New Castle, PA Micropolitan Statistical Area.
Metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs)
Youngstown–Warren–Boardman (Mahoning County and Trumbull County, Ohio, and Mercer County, Pennsylvania)
Micropolitan statistical areas (μSAs)
Salem (Columbiana County, Ohio)Republic Steel
Economy of Youngstown, OhioBlue, Frederick J.; Jenkins, William D.; Lawson, William H.; Reedy, Joan M. (1995). Mahoning Memories: A History of Youngstown and Mahoning County. Virginia Beach, VA: The Donning Company. ISBN 0-89865-944-2.
Ruminski,  Clayton J. Iron Valley: The Transformation of the Iron Industry in Ohio’s Mahoning Valley, 1802—1913 (Ohio State University Press, 2017).Coordinates: 41°15′N 80°43′W﻿ / ﻿41.250°N 80.717°W﻿ / 41.250; -80.717
