CNBC (formerly Consumer News and Business Channel) is an American basic cable business news channel that primarily carries business day coverage of U.S. and international financial markets. Following the end of the business day and on non-trading days, CNBC primarily carries financial and business-themed documentaries and reality shows. It also operates a website and mobile apps, whereby users can watch the channel via streaming media, and which provide some content that is only accessible via payment of a subscription fee. CNBC content is available on demand on smart speakers including Amazon Echo devices with Amazon Alexa, Google Home and app devices with Google Assistant, and on Apple Siri voice interfaces including iPhones. Many CNBC TV shows are available as podcasts for on-demand listening. Original content podcasts include "Strange Success" with Jane Wells, "Speakeasy" with John Harwood, and "Fort Knox" with Jon Fortt.
CNBC a division of NBCUniversal News Group, a subsidiary of NBCUniversal, with both wholly owned and operated by Comcast. It is headquartered in Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
In addition to the domestic U.S. feed, there are several international editions on the list of CNBC channels, most of which are owned by or affiliated with NBCUniversal.
CNBC traces its roots to the founding in 1979 of the Satellite Program Network (SPN), showing a low-budget mix of old movies, instructional and entertainment programs. The channel later changed its name to Tempo Television. After initially signing a letter of intent to acquire Tempo, NBC opted for a deal to lease the channel's transponder in June 1988. On this platform, and under the guidance of Tom Rogers, the channel was relaunched on April 17, 1989, as the Consumer News and Business Channel. NBC and Cablevision initially operated CNBC as a 50–50 joint venture, and it was headquartered in Fort Lee, New Jersey.
CNBC was established on April 17, 1989, as a joint venture between NBC and Cablevision as the Consumer News and Business Channel. Sue Herera and Scott Cohn joined CNBC at its inception.
CNBC had considerable difficulty getting cable carriage at first, as many providers were skeptical of placing it alongside the longer-established Financial News Network. By the winter of 1990, CNBC was only in 17 million homes – less than half of FNN's potential reach – despite the size of NBC.
The financial television concept predates both CNBC and FNN, as several independent TV stations commenced financial programming starting in the late 1960s such as WCIU Chicago & KWHY Los Angeles. Gene Inger, a Registered Investment Advisor, pioneered financial programming in several cities, notably San Francisco and Miami / Fort Lauderdale, then his part-owned WWHT Channel 68 Newark serving the NY market. Mr. Inger, never part of FNN, disengaged operationally after the sale of Channel 68 to Miami-based Wometco; and today Channel 68 is an Univision property. Inger was a guest on CNBC for years and provided online commentary from Florida.
However, around this time, FNN encountered serious financial difficulties. After a protracted bidding war with a Dow Jones & Company–Westinghouse Broadcasting consortium (the former's assets were used to build Fox Business almost two decades later), CNBC was awarded FNN by a bankruptcy judge for $154.3 million on May 21, 1991 and merged the two operations. CNBC hired around 60 of FNN's 300-person workforce. Bill Griffeth and Joe Kernen, who are still with the channel, joined CNBC at that time. Other former FNN's workforce were hired by Bloomberg Television). The deal increased the distribution of the network to over 40 million homes. Cablevision sold its 49.5% stake in CNBC to NBC upon completion of the deal. In November 2002, Cablevision sold its 50% stake in Bravo to NBC for $1.25 billion in cash and stock.
Roger Ailes was hired as the president of CNBC in 1993, tasked by NBC CEO Bob Wright with turning around the struggling network. Under Ailes' leadership from 1993 through 1995, the network doubled in value, and its revenues tripled. In addition, Ailes oversaw the launch of a 1994 spin-off channel from CNBC, called "America's Talking." Ailes left CNBC and America's Talking in late 1995 when Microsoft and NBC created a joint venture to reprogram America's Talking as MSNBC.
CNBC launched CNBC Asia in 1995 and CNBC Europe in 1996.
In 1997, CNBC formed a strategic alliance with Dow Jones, including content sharing with Dow Jones Newswires and The Wall Street Journal and the rebranding of the channel as "a service of NBC Universal and Dow Jones". CNBC's international channels were then merged into a 50-50 joint venture with their Dow Jones-owned rivals, London-based EBN (European Business News) and Singapore-based ABN (Asia Business News) in 1998.
Since December 1997, the network has held a strategic alliance with the publishing and financial information firm Dow Jones & Company. Under the agreement, CNBC has extensive access to the journalism of such outlets as MarketWatch, The Wall Street Journal, Dow Jones Newswires and Barron's, with their reporters and editorial staff making frequent appearances on the channel. Some former CNBC programs have included Dow Jones branding, while the network currently produces and syndicates the weekly Wall Street Journal Report with Maria Bartiromo. CNBC's deal with Dow Jones expired in 2012, and its continuation has been the subject of some uncertainty following the 2007 acquisition of Dow by News Corporation, parent company of Fox Business Network until the channel was spun off to 21st Century Fox in 2013 and eventually to Fox Corporation in 2019, which had been started just two months prior and whose resources have been used to build up Fox Business. News Corporation CEO Rupert Murdoch stated that the current agreement "covers actual news and access to reporters on business news" only, and that Fox and Dow Jones are free to cooperate on other issues.
During the late 1990s and early 2000s, CNBC's ratings increased sharply along with the stock market, often beating those of CNN during market hours. The highest daytime viewership of the network in 2000 was 343,000.
However, when the dot-com bubble began to burst, CNBC's viewing figures declined in tandem. In 2002, CNBC's ratings fell 44% and were down another 5% in 2003. The network's ratings steadily fell until bottoming in Q1 2005, with an average viewership of 134,000 during the day.
From 2001 to 2006, the CNBC website was operated by MSN.
In August 2003, CNBC signed a deal to provide weather content from AccuWeather.
In October 2003, CNBC moved its world headquarters from 2200 Fletcher Avenue, Fort Lee to 900 Sylvan Avenue (Route 9W) in Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, which features completely digital video production and studios made by PDG Ltd of Beeston, Nottinghamshire and the FX Group of Ocoee, Florida.
NBC Universal reacquired full control of loss-making CNBC Europe and CNBC Asia from Dow Jones at the end of 2005. The licensing agreement between Dow and CNBC U.S. remained intact, however.
On October 10, 2007, CNBC HD, a 1080i high-definition television simulcast of CNBC, was launched, first on DirecTV.
Coinciding with the extreme market volatility of the financial crisis of 2007-2008, ratings hit an all-time high of 416,000 in Q3.
Average daytime viewership (6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) reached a seven-year high of 310,000 viewers in the first quarter of 2008.
Annual revenues topped $510 million in 2006. Profits exceeded $333 million in 2007. CNBC was the second most profitable of NBC Universal's thirteen cable channels in the United States, behind only the USA Network.
CNBC has also held a content deal with The New York Times since January 2008, which has widely been seen as an attempt by both parties to take on increased competition from News Corporation. Under the agreement, CNBC has access to the business coverage of the Times, while video from CNBC.com is featured on the Times' website. The station's video clips and other content are also distributed through Yahoo! Finance and, as of May 2008, AOL.
In September 2006, CNBC began its own stock market index in conjunction with London's FTSE Group. The FTSE CNBC Global 300 includes the fifteen largest companies from each of the sectors of the Industry Classification Benchmark as well as the thirty largest companies from emerging markets. Calculated continuously from 9 p.m. through to 4:10 p.m. ET each trading day, the index is referenced throughout the network's live programming, particularly on Worldwide Exchange.
The channel also maintains the "CNBC Investor Network", a series of webcam connections to the trading rooms of various independent financial institutions across the United States. The scheme was launched on October 22, 2007 and allows participating traders and strategists to appear on the network during the business day.
In 2013, host Maria Bartiromo left CNBC for Fox Business Network.
On October 13, 2014, coincidentally the 11th anniversary of CNBC's relocation to its current facilities in Englewood Cliffs, NJ, CNBC switched to a full 16:9 letterbox presentation, in line with its Asian and European siblings (see "On-air presentation" below for more information). As a result, both of the network's standard-definition and high-definition feeds now show the same 16:9 format. CNBC also updated its graphics package, replacing what had been used since March 1, 2010. The "flippers", which appeared across the top of the screen from December 19, 2005 to October 10, 2014, were moved back to the lower right of the screen. Its lower third are now similar to CNBC Asia and CNBC Europe, the former updated its own graphics package on February 9, 2015, with CNBC Europe following suit exactly a month later (March 9, 2015). In breaking news mode, the background color is changed from blue to red. As of January 4, 2016, the network's 480i standard definition feed now shows the same 16:9 HD feed on its 4:3 picture, due to the application of the AFD #10 flag. 
The graphics are designed by Sweden-based Magoo 3D studios.
On January 6, 2015, CNBC partnered with Cogent Research to calculate the viewership of its business day programming by surveying financial advisers and investors, with the goal of providing a more accurate measurement of the network's out-of-home viewership; Nielsen will still be used to track the viewership of its entertainment programming.
By 2017, Fox Business had overtaken CNBC as the most watched daytime business news network.
CNBC’s online video operations generated an all-time high of 1.92 billion total digital video starts across platforms in 2020.
CNBC has operated international versions of the channel since 1995, when CNBC Asia originally launched. CNBC Europe followed in 1996. On December 9, 1997, Dow Jones & Company and NBC announced the merger of their international business news channels. This resulted in a merger of CNBC Europe with Dow Jones' European Business News, and likewise of CNBC Asia with Asia Business News. From then (until January 2006) the international CNBC services carried the tagline "A Service of NBC (Universal) and Dow Jones" (or depending on other local partners, a variation of this tagline). Correspondents from Dow Jones Newswires contribute to the channels. On December 31, 2005, the sale by Dow Jones of its interests in the international CNBC channels took effect. On January 1, 2006, the "A Service of NBC Universal and Dow Jones" tagline was removed from the international CNBC channels, in line with this.
In 2007, CNBC Asia dropped the word "Asia" from its channel idents, on September 30, 2008, CNBC Europe similarly dropped the word "Europe" from its logo. This means the three major CNBC channels: U.S., Europe, and Asia are all known on-screen as simply CNBC.
CNBC Europe is headquartered in London, and CNBC Asia is headquartered in Singapore.
Besides CNBC Europe and CNBC Asia, the network also operates local business news channels in association with other companies. These channels include Class CNBC in Italy, CNBC-e in Turkey, CNBC Arabiya in the UAE, Nikkei CNBC in Japan, CNBC TV18, CNBC Awaaz, and CNBC Baazar(A special Gujarati Language channel) in India, CNBC Pakistan in Pakistan and TVN CNBC in Poland.
CNBC Europe and CNBC Asia are rebranded in some parts of the world with tickers containing local financial information. Examples include CNBC Nordic, CNBC Singapore, CNBC Hong Kong and CNBC Australia (CNBC Australia and Singapore also produce five-minute updates at 12:55 p.m., 5:55 p.m. and 9:55 p.m. for free-to-air network, SBS TV).
In North America, CNBC World airs business programming from CNBC Europe and CNBC Asia, as well as weekly magazine programs provided by CNBC TV18 and the United Nations.
In Canada, CNBC can be seen with almost identical programming to its U.S. counterpart. However, due to Canadian programming rights, the 9:00 p.m. slot which had shown television programming in the past such as Deal or No Deal, The Apprentice, 1 vs. 100, and Heads Up Poker, as well as any and all Olympic Games coverage that the channel continues to carry, are replaced by CNBC World programming. This leads to program blackout problems. For example,The Apprentice 5 that aired April 23, 2006, was assumed to not be available anywhere for Canadians due to these blackouts. While the first airing at 9:00 p.m. ET was blacked out, the second airing at midnight ET was accidentally shown.
CNBC Africa was launched on June 1, 2007. With roughly $600 million spent on advertising in South Africa alone, the network saw a business opportunity. The network has bureaus in Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa and it produces nine hours of local (African) programming per business day.
The launch of the Korean language channel SBS-CNBC in January 2010 marked the fifteenth CNBC-branded channel worldwide.
On January 10, 2016, CNBC and Trans Media announced a strategic partnership that will see the creation of the Indonesian language channel CNBC Indonesia.
CNBC provides business news programming on weekdays from 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Eastern Time, while broadcasting talk shows, investigative reports, documentaries, infomercials, and other programs at all other times. A rolling ticker provides real-time updates on share prices, as well as market indices, news summaries, and weather updates. A rotating top band of the screen rotates provides real-time updates on index and commodity prices from world markets.
Live programming is broadcast on weekdays from 5:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m. and provides reports on U.S. businesses, updates of stock market indices and commodities prices, interviews with CEOs and business leaders, and commentary from many investment professionals. The following is the usual weekday "business day" (term used by CNBC hosts and announcers) lineup (as of April 2022, all times Eastern):
Worldwide Exchange: Brian Sullivan
Squawk Box: Joe Kernen, Rebecca Quick, and Andrew Ross Sorkin
Squawk on the Street: Carl Quintanilla, David Faber, Jim Cramer, and Morgan Brennan
TechCheck: Carl Quintanilla, Jon Fortt, Deirdre Bosa, and Julia Boorstin
Fast Money Halftime Report: Scott Wapner
The Exchange: Kelly Evans
Power Lunch: Kelly Evans and Tyler Mathisen
Closing Bell: Sara Eisen
Closing Bell: Overtime: Scott Wapner
Fast Money: Melissa Lee (host), Pete Najarian, Guy Adami, Tim Seymour, and Karen Finerman (panelists)
Options Action: Melissa Lee (host), seen on Fridays only
Mad Money: hosted by money manager Jim Cramer, is an hour-long show that gives stock advice to viewers who call to the program. The show also has a popular segment called "The Lightning Round". In August 2007, Cramer's on-air tirade about the weakening economy, which was seen during the "Stop Trading" segment on Street Signs, received national attention.
The News with Shepard Smith: Shepard SmithThe Car Chasers
Treasure Detectives
American Greed
Restaurant Startup
Blue Collar Millionaires
Jay Leno's Garage
The Profit
West Texas Investors Club
Secret Lives of the Super Rich
Cleveland Hustles
The Partner
BYOB: Be Your Own Boss
Deadly Rich (a true crime series focusing on the wealthy)
Staten Island Hustle, a revival of former NBC game show Deal or No Deal
Jay Leno's Garage
Secret Lives of the Super Rich
"CNBC Cinema" - CNBC added business and financial-themed movies to its Friday night lineup under the name 
The News with Shepard Smith - described as being "non-partisan" and "fact-based".
Business Nation, anchored by award-winning journalist David Faber. Each edition of the program covers three stories; a mixture of profiles, investigative pieces and features. The format of the show is structured similarly to HBO's Real Sports.
CNBC on Assignment (for example, The Age of Wal-Mart)
Cover to Cover
The Suze Orman Show
On the Money.Marijuana Inc: Inside America's Pot Industry (2009),
Trash Inc: The Secret Life of Garbage (2010)
Supermarkets Inc: Inside a $500 Billion Money Machine (2011)
Customer (Dis)Service (2012)
UPS/FedEX: Inside the Package Wars (2012),
Love @ First Byte: The Secret Science of Online Dating (2012).National Geographic Explorer (moved to MSNBC and then to the National Geographic Channel)
Louis Rukeyser's Wall Street (ended its run on December 31, 2004 at Louis Rukeyser's request due to illness)
Market Week with Maria Bartiromo (renamed After Hours with Maria Bartiromo and then Special Report with Maria Bartiromo—cancelled in 2004)
Tim Russert
American Le Mans Series races (inaugural 1999 season only, as part of agreement with NBC Sports)
Senior PGA Tour golf (moved to Golf Channel)A talk show hosted by Dennis Miller
Late Night with Conan O'Brien
Deal or No Deal
The Apprentice
The Apprentice: Martha Stewart
1 vs. 100
Until 2017, CNBC participated in USA Network's coverage of the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show due to conflicts with WWE Raw.
Since 2013, CNBC regularly shows one Premier League game at 10:00 p.m. ET.CNBC has a licensing partnership with Paradies Lagardère to operate retail locations in United States airports branded as CNBC News, CNBC Express, and CNBC SmartShop. The stores sell CNBC-branded merchandise as well as snacks and drinks.
CNBC has been criticized for allegedly amplifying bull and bear markets, particularly in the run-up to the dot-com bubble and the subprime mortgage crisis. In response to these criticisms, CNBC anchors have pointed to the size of the market and noted that influencing it is "a little out of our reach."
Jon Stewart on Comedy Central's The Daily Show has been a vocal critic of CNBC and some of its personalities, beginning after comments were made by Rick Santelli. Despite the lack of direct comments by the network, several personalities have defended their predictions and comments.
CNBC was accused by the Obama administration of "cable chatter"—the excessive and sometimes brutal discussion on a particular topic, often one-sided.
Jim Cramer's stock picks on his CNBC show Mad Money were found by Barron's magazine in 2007 to have underperformed the S&P 500 stock index over the previous two years. Barron's stated that "his picks haven't beaten the market. Over the past two years, viewers holding Cramer's stocks would be up 12% while the Dow rose 22% and the S&P 500 16%." CNBC disputed the magazine's findings.
List of CNBC personalities
Bloomberg Television
Fox Business NetworkOfficial websiteCoordinates: 40°53′55″N 73°56′21″W﻿ / ﻿40.89861°N 73.93917°W﻿ / 40.89861; -73.93917
