The Association of Football Federations of Azerbaijan (AFFA; Azerbaijani: Azərbaycan Futbol Federasiyaları Assosiasiyası, AFFA) is the governing body of football in Azerbaijan. Formed in 1992, it is responsible for overseeing all aspects of the amateur and professional game in its territory.
AFFA sanctions all competitive football matches within its remit at national level, and indirectly at local level through the AFFA Amateur League. It runs numerous competitions, the most famous of which is the Azerbaijan Cup. It is also responsible for appointing the management of the men's, women's and youth national football teams and leagues.
AFFA is a member of both UEFA and FIFA.
The AFFA was formed on 26 March 1992, after Azerbaijan gained its independence from the USSR. On 23 February 2009, the AFFA, along with UEFA vice president Şenes Erzik, unveiled the Azerbaijan Football Academy.
In 2010, the association adopted a new logo. In 2012, the federation held an election with Rovnag Abdullayev being the only candidate, the assembly was marred with controversies.
The country's football association received a major blow in April 2002, when UEFA imposed a two-year ban in response to a long-standing conflict between the AFFA and majority of the Azerbaijan Premier League clubs. The domestic championship was abandoned as a result of the conflict and the top clubs prevented their players from playing for the national team, with tax officials also probing allegations of fraud at the Azerbaijan federation.
It organizes the following competitions:
Men's football
Azerbaijan Premier League (or Topaz Premyer Liqası); First league
Azerbaijan First Division (or Birinci Divizion); Second league
Azerbaijan Cup
Azerbaijan Supercup
Azerbaijan Futsal Premier League
AFFA Amateur LeagueWomen's football
Azerbaijan Women's Football LeagueThe AFFA also organises national football teams representing Azerbaijan at all age levels:
Companies that AFFA currently has sponsorship deals with include:
Professional Football League of AzerbaijanAssociation of Football Federations of Azerbaijan (in Azerbaijani and English)
"AFFA TV". Archived from the original on 7 October 2011. Retrieved 7 April 2019.
Azerbaijan at FIFA site
Azerbaijan at UEFA site