Finley /ˈfɪnli/ is a town in the Riverina region of New South Wales, Australia.  It is the largest town in the Berrigan Shire local government area. At the 2016 census, Finley had a population of 2,519 people.
The town is located approximately 140 kilometres (87 mi) west of Albury on the intersection of the Newell Highway and Riverina Highways.
The first permanent residence in the town was built in 1878. The post office opened on 1 January 1881 but was known as Murray Hut until 1893.
Europeans first settled the area around Finley in the early 1840s, with wheat becoming the main crop.
The Finley Agricultural & Pastoral Association was formed in 1912 and held its first show on 17 September 1913. The same agricultural show is still held annually on the first Sunday in September (Father's Day).
Periods of severe drought, combined with the Great Depression of the early 1930s, forced many farmers to abandon their holdings.
In 1935, construction on the Mulwala Canal began in order to provide employment and bring water to the area’s rich farmland, with irrigation reaching the area in 1939, celebrated with a 'Back-To-Finley' event. This enabled the region to prosper with beef and dairy cattle, sheep, wheat, rice, barley, maize and canola.
Finley has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:
Narrandera-Tocumwal railway: Finley Railway PrecinctFinley has two primary schools, St Joseph's School, (Roman Catholic) and Finley Public School. Finley High School attracts students from a wide catchment including the towns of Berrigan, Tocumwal, Jerilderie and Blighty.
Finley is also home to a campus of Riverina TAFE.
Australian rules football, cricket and netball are all very popular in the town.  Sporting teams include the Finley Football Club, who compete in the Murray Football League. The town also offers soccer, touch rugby, basketball, tennis and a Pony Club.
The Finley Rodeo Committee holds an annual rodeo every January and Finley Apex Club hosts a tractor pull every February.
Finley has an 18-hole green grass golf course and two bowling green locations.
Jack Hawkins - Former  Geelong Australian rules footballer
Shane Crawford - Former Hawthorn Australian rules footballer and 1999 Brownlow Medallist, 2019 I’m A Celebrity... Get Me Out Of Here contestant
Mark Whiley - Former GWS Giants & Carlton Blues Australian rules footballer
Tom Hawkins - Current Geelong Australian rules footballer
Kram, Whitty and Janet - members of rock band Spiderbait
Craig Giles - musicianCommunity website
Berrigan Shire - Official Site
Finley Railway Station
Finley Show Society Inc.