Akebia is a genus of five species of flowering plant, within the family Lardizabalaceae. The scientific name, akebia, is a Latinization of the Japanese name for species Akebia quinata: akebi (通草).
There are five species:
Akebia ×pentaphylla (Makino) Makino (A. quinata × A. trifoliata)Akebia quinata and Akebia trifoliata both bear edible fruit, containing a sweet white flesh. Flavor varies greatly in akebias, even within the same species, with some individuals displaying a complex flavor profile resembling a mixture of banana, passionfruit and lychee, with others being mild, or even insipid.
Akebia is often mentioned in Japanese literature, where it is evocative of pastoral settings. Although the akebi commonly refers to the five-leafed species, the three-leafed species is used in much the same way for novelty food, medicine, and for vine material.
While only a minor food eaten while foraging in the past, akebia is considered a specialty crop today, only available when in season. The pods contain a white, semi-translucent gelatinous pulp that is mildly sweet and full of seeds. The taste is described as sweet but rather "insipid".  Some people recollect in idyllic terms how they foraged for it in the hills as children.
The purple-colored, slightly bitter rind has been used as a vegetable in Yamagata Prefecture or in those northern areas, where the typical recipe calls for stuffing the rind with minced chicken (or pork) flavored with miso. Minor quantities of akebia are shipped to the urban market as a novelty vegetable.
In addition to consuming the fruit, akebia leaves are also made into a tea infusion. Outside of food and drinks, akebia vines are used for basket-weaving crafts. An old source lists Minakuchi, Shiga and Tsugaru (now Aomori Prefecture) as localities that produced baskets from the vines of trifoliate variety.
Bailey, L. H. (2005). Manual of Gardening (Second ed.). Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.Akebia: Three Varieties including photographs by Paghat's Garden
Akebia: Edible Fruits including photographs by Paghat's Garden