The General Directorate of Security (Turkish: Emniyet Genel Müdürlüğü) or Turkish Police Service (Turkish: Türk Polis Teşkilatı) is the national civilian police force responsible for law enforcement of the Republic of Turkey, which is affiliated with the Ministry of Interior.
In the provinces, it operates under the command of governors (Turkish: vali) and district governors (Turkish: kaymakam). Civil administrators (Turkish: mülki amir) are responsible for the security and well being of towns and districts. The Turkish National Police (TNP) operates within the network of the civil administration system and carries out its duties under the command and control of the civil authority. Town governors and heads of district administrations supervise the force.
The TNP is organised as follows:
Central organisation
Provincial organisation
81 Directorates of Provincial Police
751 Police Directorates of Towns affiliated to Provinces
22 Border Gates Police Directorates
18 Free-Zone police stations
834 police stations in 81 ProvincesIn general, the police's realm of responsibility is geographically located inside the municipal boundaries in Turkey. In accordance with the “Law on Duties and Powers of the Police”, the duties of the Police are to:
provide public peace and order
provide security of persons and properties
detect, arrest and transfer both offenders and case evidence to the appropriate judicial bodies
perform duties apart from the administrative such as judicial assigned by laws, regulations and government acts
prevent crime in order to protect public safety and orderThe TNP also has political duties such as the protection of the integrity of the state and the preservation of constitutional order. Furthermore, the TNP has administrative functions, including preventive, protective and assistance duties.
A Traffic Services Department, a Highways Traffic Security Council and a Supreme Board for Highway Security have been established in order to deal with traffic problems more effectively.
The TNP hosts the Istanbul Conference on Democracy and Global Security.
All Turkish police officers wear navy-blue uniforms and caps.
Patrol cars can be identified by their unique blue-white design and the writing “Polis” (Turkish for 'Police') on the side doors and hood.
Commissioners and police chiefs wear silver stars rank on their shoulders and police directors wear gold stars.
Some well-known police units in Turkey are: 
Martılar (English: Gulls) bike patrol units
Yunuslar (English: Dolphins) motorcycle units
Şahinler (English: Falcons) motorcycle units of the traffic department.
TOMA armored water cannon designed for riot control.
Çevik Kuvvet (English: Agile Force) who handle riot control cases.
Özel Harekat(English: Special Operations) which is the special response unit of the directorate (quite like the American SWAT or the German GSG 9).
Karşı Atak Timi (English: Counter Attack Team) close protection service for the president.
Aviation DepartmentThe TNP receives two categories of training, the first being in-service training provided by the Department of Education operating directly under the General Directorate of Security; whereas pre-profession training is provided by the Police Academy. The Police Academy offers five different training programs:
Police Schools (2 years)
Police Training Centers (8 months)
Police Chiefs Training Center (1 year)
Security Sciences Institute
Higher Level Management TrainingThere are other educational institutions that give expert in-service training, such as the Turkish International Academy Against Drugs and Organized Crime and the Crime Investigation and Research Education Center.
Yavuz 16
Sarsılmaz Kılınç 2000Heckler & Koch MP5FN 303
Milkor MGL


Patrol cars[edit]
Ford Transit Courier - most common patrol car
Fiat Doblo - most common patrol car
Renault Mégane - traffic police car
Renault Symbol - standard patrol and traffic police car
Hyundai Accent - traffic police car
Toyota Corolla - traffic and motorway police car
Fiat Egea
Toyota Hilux - traffic police car
Renault Fluence - traffic police car
Renault Kangoo
Ford Transit Connect
Dacia Duster - used by Yunus units
Fiat Linea
Hyundai Elantra - traffic police car
Opel Insignia - traffic police car
BMW 320i (F30) - traffic police car
Subaru Impreza - traffic police car
Toyota Prius
Mini Cooper
Audi A3
BMW 120i
Nissan Navara
Ford Ranger - used by forensics
GMC Yukon - used by presidential guards
Fiat Marea - retired
Fiat Brava - retired
Renault Laguna - retired
Ford Taunus - retired
Tofaş Şahin - retired
Renault 12 Toros - retired
Renault 19 Europa - retired


Vans and busses[edit]
Ford Transit
Ford Transit Custom
Fiat Ducato
Isuzu Turkuaz
Otokar Sultan
Armoured vehicles[edit]
Otokar Akrep
Otokar Cobra
Nurol Ejder
BMC Kirpi
TOMA
Otokar Ural


Beechcraft Super King Air
Bell 206
Bell 429
MD Helicopters MD 600
Sikorsky S-70
Aérospatiale Alouette II For surveillance purposes
TAI/AgustaWestland T129 ATAK
TAI Anka
Bayraktar UAV
ÇAĞATAY VTOL UAV
Arcturus T-20 UAVList of Chiefs of the General Directorate of Security
Istanbul Chief of PoliceGeneral Directorate of Security (in Turkish)
Directorate of Security, Foreign Relations Department
Police Association
Uniforms of the General Directorate of Security
https://twitter.com/EmniyetGM