The 1983 Burlington mayoral election was held March 1, 1983. Incumbent Mayor Bernie Sanders won with 52.12% of the popular vote against Democratic nominee Judith Stephany and Republican nominee James Gilson. 
The Democratic Party unsuccessfully sought to give its mayoral nomination to multiple politicians before choosing Stephany, who had launched her campaign hours before the selection caucus. She would later state that her late entry into the campaign had contributed to her defeat. In a 1985 survey, three-quarters of Democratic voters surveyed reported supporting Sanders in this election.
Following his election in the 1981 election Mayor Bernie Sanders faced difficulties with the city council of Burlington, Vermont, due to eleven of the thirteen members of the board of alderman opposing Sanders. The council would oppose measures proposed by Sanders and override his vetoes on legislation. Sanders formed a coalition between independents and the Citizens Party. Sanders announced on December 3, 1982, that he would seek reelection as mayor at Burlington's city hall. On January 22, 1983, the Citizen Party voted unanimously to endorse Sanders, although Sanders ran as an independent. He spent $33,000 during the campaign.
Judith B. Stephany, Minority Leader of the Vermont House of Representatives
William H. Williams, gas station ownerThe Democratic Party of Burlington, Vermont, faced difficulties finding a mayoral candidate as state Senator Thomas Crowley, Chittenden County Chief Deputy State's Attorney Harold Eaton Jr., and Alderman James Burns all declined to run for the Democratic nomination. State Senator Esther Sorrell considered running for the Democratic nomination and an unsuccessful attempt was made to draft state Senator Mark Kaplan. Lieutenant Governor Madeleine Kunin stated that she was not interesting in running for mayor despite polling showing her defeating Sanders.
William H. Williams, a gas station owner, was the first person to announce a campaign for the mayoralty when he announced that he would seek the Democratic nomination in August 1982.
State Representative Judith B. Stephany, who was serving as Minority Leader in the Vermont House of Representatives, announced her mayoral campaign hours before the Burlington Democratic caucus was set to select the party's mayoral nominee. Stephany won the Democratic nomination against Williams by a margin of three to one. Stephany initially chose to retain her seat and leadership position in the House of Representatives, but later announced that she would resign on January 30, 1983, to campaign for mayor.
James Gilson, the chairman of the Burlington School Board of Commissioners, announced on November 8, 1982, that he would run for the mayoralty as a Republican. He formally announced his candidacy at Burlington's city hall on November 12. Gilson won the Republican nomination with unanimous support on January 20, 1983.
Sanders proposed a campaign spending limit of $15,000, but Gilson rejected the offer. Gilson accused Sanders of being anti-business and fiscally irresponsible, claiming that after-school programs Sanders had started were too expensive.
Stephany attempted to distance herself from the mayoralty of Gordon Paquette, which was seen as old-fashioned and unpopular; her campaign frequently stressed Sanders' poor relations with. In spite of her generally liberal record, Stephany was opposed to abortion, which drew ire to her campaign from the feminist movement.
Stephany stated that her late entry into the election had contributed to her defeat, while Gilson's poor result was attributed to him being uncharismatic and a generally poor campaigner. Governor of Vermont Richard Snelling, when asked about the result, attributed Sanders' victory to Stephany and Gilson adopting negative campaigns, which were traditionally ineffective in Vermont. According to a survey of voters performed by political scientist Tom Rice in 1985, support for Sanders was strongest among working-class voters, with people making under $20,000 a year supporting him at significantly higher rates than those making above $20,000 a year.
