Bryant & Stratton College (BSC) is a private for-profit college with campuses in New York, Ohio, Virginia, and Wisconsin, as well as an online campus. Founded in 1854, the college offers associate degree programs at all campuses and bachelor's degree programs at some campuses. The college is approved by the New York State Board of Regents and accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education.
John Collins Bryant, Henry Beadman Bryant, and Henry Dwight Stratton were early graduates of Folsom Business College in Cleveland, Ohio, which they later purchased from Ezekiel G. Folsom, who founded his school in 1848.  Folsom was a former student of Platt Rogers Spencer who developed a standardized style of writing useful in business transactions before the invention of the typewriter.
Platt Spencer played a role in the formation of Bryant & Stratton College serving as a partner and teacher at the school which originally focused on bookkeeping and standardized penmanship. Bryant & Stratton College was organized in 1854 to provide practical workplace education, and was formerly known as Bryant and Stratton Business Institute. A year later they developed programs for women.  The college became well known in the middle of the 19th century under Platt's influence.
In addition to the Cleveland school, Bryant and Stratton established business schools that operated under the name of Bryant & Stratton & Co. International Commercial Colleges in most major US cities. By 1864 as many as 40 to 50 schools existed. Tuition was $40 for an entire program of study. The chain was not without controversy about its marketing and business practices, and it declined in size after the death of Stratton.
In 2008, the private equity firm Parthenon Capital Partners bought a significant stake in the school.
In 2009, Bryant & Stratton was the first college to host an online graduation ceremony on Second Life.
In 2017, Bryant & Stratton Limited Partnership (family) acquired Parthenon Capital Partners' stake in the schools.
In 2018, Bryant and Stratton opened a school in Racine, Wisconsin, closed its downtown Milwaukee campus, and moved its Cleveland campus to Solon, Ohio.
In December 2020, Bryant & Stratton College announced that they would be donating the school to their non-profit family foundation.
Today, there are 19 physical locations and an online education division. The board chair of the school is Bryant Prentice III, great-great grandson of John Collins Bryant. The current president of Bryant & Stratton is Francis J. Felser, who has a doctorate from University of Phoenix. and has worked in various capacities at the school for more than 25 years.
Bryant & Stratton's online faculty consists of 40 full-time instructors and 430 part-time instructors. The Buffalo campus has 33 full-time instructors and 112 part-time instructors.
Bryant & Stratton College offers associate and bachelor's degrees.
According to the College Scorecard, Bryant & Stratton online has an 18 percent graduation rate and a median student debt after graduation ranging from $11,400 to $51,442. Median salary after attending ranges from 17, 859 to 41,937. Six percent of student debtors were making progress with their loans.  College Navigator reports a 18 percent graduation rate and a 16 percent transfer-out rate.
Bryant & Stratton College has Junior College Division II sports at several campuses and actively recruits high school students.
Notable students of the school include Henry Ford, R.J. Reynolds and Joseph E. Seagram.
Lou Blonger, crime boss
Albert Elijah Dunning, theologian
Henry Ford, car manufacturer, billionaire, philanthropist
John W. Harreld, senator
James J. Heffernan, US representative
Antonio Joseph, politician
Shalrie Joseph, head coach of the Grenada national football team
John D. Larkin, founder of Larkin Company
Martin B. Madden, U.S. representative
J. L. R. McCollum, member of the Wisconsin State Assembly
Timothy McVeigh, American domestic terrorist
John William Moore, US representative
R. J. Reynolds, tobacco manufacturer
John D. Rockefeller, oligarch, billionaire, philanthropist
Arthur Schoellkopf, industrialist
Joseph E. Seagram, Canadian businessman (founder of Seagram Distillery) and politician
Charles Woodruff, Brigadier General in the United States ArmyBryant & Stratton launched its online division in 1997. The college provides selected degrees over the Internet. According to College Navigator, approximately 40 percent of BSC's students are participating as online students.
New York State campuses can be found in Albany, Buffalo, Syracuse, and six other locations. 
Ohio has four campuses, including Akron. Virginia has campuses in Hampton, Richmond, and Virginia Beach. In Wisconsin, there are three campuses.
On April 3, 2015, Bryant & Stratton College was placed on a Department of Education list to have its finances more closely scrutinized (a process called Heightened Cash Monitoring). Colleges placed on this list generally have federal funding restricted due to concerns of their financial responsibility.
Official website