Fox's Peter Pan and the Pirates (known in international markets as 20th Century Fox's Peter Pan & the Pirates) is an American animated television series based on J.M. Barrie's Peter Pan that aired on Fox Kids from September 8, 1990 to September 10, 1991. 65 episodes were produced.
The show was one of Fox's first forays into programming for children.
The television show focuses as much on the pirates as it does on Peter Pan. Captain Hook and Mr. Smee traditionally are the only pirates who receive any attention in the story, but here, the other crew members of the Jolly Roger (Robert Mullins, Alf Mason, Gentleman Ignatious Starkey, Billy Jukes, and Cookson) are given distinct personalities and character development. A real force to be reckoned with, Hook is a powerful, temperamental, cultured, intelligent, and charming pirate with an insatiable thirst for vengeance.
Some attention was also given to the Native American characters (no longer called Redskins). The people and their customs were often featured in the storyline.
Peter Pan (voiced by Jason Marsden, 64 episodes) is the titular protagonist of the series and the leader of his group. He has dark brown hair worn in a ponytail and wears a brown costume with a cape. He also carries a dagger held in a scabbard on his right boot. He is always up for a challenge and adventure no matter how perilous. He is quite reckless and takes no notice of the bad consequences or mistakes and is no wiser after the event. He can't read and forgets nearly everything. His favourite activity is his confrontations with Captain Hook and would never allow to put an end to him. Even though he may be naïve, stubborn and always up for fun and games, he knows and recognizes the danger and cares for his friends.
Tinker Bell (voiced by Debi Derryberry, 54 episodes) is a red-headed fairy and Peter Pan's sidekick. She is often the more practical of the two and is there for him and the others to get them out of jams if and whenever she can. Her fairy dust allows humans to fly, but has other abilities, like making fire or light. She is often the one who has more knowledge than Peter's friends. She is sensitive and her power and existence are dependent on the human belief in magic and fantasy. She would love to have Peter all up to herself, and regularly becomes jealous of Wendy. Nevertheless she would never allow anything to happen neither to Wendy nor to anyone else!
Wendy Darling (voiced by Christina Lange, 58 episodes) is the oldest of the Darling siblings, the big sister of John and Michael. She has short black hair, dark mint coloured eyes, wears a pink dress and a crown made of white flowers. She is like a mother for the boys and tells them bedtime stories. As Peter claims that girls are smarter and more intelligent than boys, Wendy is often calmer and more mature than the rest of the group and can become very serious. However, she likes playing games and having fun and regularly takes part in playing a trick on someone. She is closer to Peter than anyone else and spends the most time with him.
John Darling (voiced by Jack Lynch, 54 episodes) is the middle Darling sibling, Wendy's and Michael's brother. He has hazel blond hair and wears a brown bowler hat or derby. It's obvious that his main place is in the Darling Family, but not once can be seen (with his gender and age) also as one of the Lost Boys. With them, he shares the bed and fights with the pirates using a magic wooden sword, which always grows again after breaking. The big difference is that he wears more formal clothes and more often takes off his hat. From all the friends, he's the one who spends the most time with books. He also likes making notes, writing journals and enjoys painting.
Michael Darling (voiced by Whit Hertford, 53 episodes and 1 cameo in "Hook, the faithful son") is Wendy and John's brother and the youngest of the Darling siblings. He has light brown curly hair and wears blue pajamas. He is the youngest and smallest of the group and has a big basket as his own bed. Sometimes he is slower and more frightened, so Peter and the others must look after him, where the most he desires the care of Wendy. He loves playing around, having fun and especially enjoys running after animals.
The Lost Boys is a group of six boys who got orphaned or lost. They only remember their life in Neverland. Their clothes are informal and a little disrupted and they all wear caps shaped from various animal heads, which are a very important part of them, changing their headdress or taking it off they do only as a very special reason.
Nibs (voiced by Adam Carl, 50 episodes, 2 cameos in "The Dream", "Elementary, my dear Pan") is one of the tallest and the eldest of the Lost Boys. He has light golden blond hair and wears a cap shaped like a bear's head with the face cut out. He is Peter's second-in-command and leads the group when Peter is away. He is the most responsible, sensible and mature when making decisions. However, as a child, he also loves playing around and havong fun, can become a little too slow and inattentive and doesn't note the danger or some important details that surround him. But he works on himself to be active and to solve the problem and as being one of the oldest from the group, he cares for the little ones. His other markedly advantage is his bravery and his physical strength, what can be seen, that he not once carries one of his friends or can hold somebody for a longer time.
Slightly (voiced by Scott Menville, 50 episodes) is the tallest and second eldest Lost Boy. He has pale skin, honey blond hair and wears a cap in the shape of a parrot's head. As a reference to his name, he constantly uses the word "slightly" in his sentences and regularly the others when talking to him use it, too. His ambition is to be Peter's second-in-command. But when the occasion appears, he sees that he's not qualified for the position. He is often naive and immature when making decisions what can cause trouble for the others. However, he has a clearly seen sincerity and, just the opposite of Peter, doesn't hide to be scared of something and is aware of his mistakes and when making some he honestly admits. His hobby is collecting shells.
Curly (voiced by Josh Keaton, 49 episodes, 1 cameo - "Tootles, the bold") - a hispanic Lost Boy with a cap shaped like a tiger's head with the face cut out. He has a tanned complexion and caramel brown hair. Age-wise, he is in the middle of the Lost Boys. He regularly stays closer to Nibs and Slightly, whereas the half of the Lost Boys they either are the ones, who hold each other back and have none or the least important role in the chosen episode or opposite and from all the six Lost Boys they get the biggest role and go together through the trouble and have adventures. But in fact he doesn't have a special person of the group, he is particularly close to (as Tink to Peter, Michael to Wendy or the Twins to each other) and is generally more on his own. He has a sense of humor and loves having fun, but also knows and recognizes when the situation is more serious. It's very important for him, not to be seen by the others as useless or clumsy, so he does everything to act in a more determined and independent manner.
The Twins (voiced by Aaron Lohr and Michael Bacall, adsence: Tall Twin - 51 episodes, 1 cameo - "Pirate Boys, Lost Men"; Short Twin - 49 episodes, 2 cameos - "Pirate Boys, Lost Men", "Peter in Wonderland") are two Lost Boys who are biracial twins. They are not identical, aside from both wearing caps in the shape of a leopard's head with cut-outs in the front for their faces. Individually, and only in the written language, they are known as Tall Twin and Short Twin, their heights being the main distinction. The other notable difference is their colour, Tall Twin having dark skin and black curly hair and Short Twin having light skin and straight ginger hair. They are so synchronized that they accomplish more when they work together and when talking they finish each other's sentence. They are known as the mechanics and inventors of the group and most of their activity is creating, building and testing their own inventions and machines. It can come out, that their inventions are the rescue in a difficult situation and another time it is their (general) knowledge and acquaintance on machines. Not once they do not anticipate some details in their inventions, which can cause secondary effects and trouble.
Tootles (voiced by Chris M. Allport, 44 episodes) is the youngest and smallest of the Lost Boys who wears a cap in the shape of a panda's head with face cut-out and has a black blotch around his left eye. He is very small and has a round stomach, because he loves eating. He is often clumsy which can cause problems for the others when looking for adventures. He can also become too sensitive, especially when getting judged or not noticed by the others. When Michael is not around, often Tootles becomes the pet of the family, as being the youngest Lost Boy. But generally, he is more equal with the older boys and especially when fighting with the pirates he is very self-confident and doesn't show any fear. It can come out Tootles has the idea how to save the situation and as referred to in the episode "Tootles and the Dragon" he is the most patient of the group.Captain James Algernon Cloudesley Hook (voiced by Tim Curry, 64 episodes) is the main antagonist of the series and Peter Pan's nemesis. He is the captain of his pirate crew. His right hand is missing and he has a sharp iron hook in its place. Rather than the traditional long black hair (or wig) and long mustache, this Hook is clean-shaven and has his white hair styled in the manner of a powdered wig. As the captain of "The Jolly Roger", he has a pirate crew and a parrot named Short Tom. In contrast to his bumbling crew, Hook is very much the aristocrat, and is very well-read and charming in a sinister way. He can be called a fine musician and, despite the loss of his hand, he is very good at playing a harpsichord, his beloved instrument he not once treats as a treasure and can become sensitive to its point, for instance if someone else plays it or uses it carelessly. He is immune to Neverland's usual magic. However, can be affected by strange magic. Two members of his family are mentioned, although they are already dead: his brother Patch, who owned his own pirate ship called "The Rake", and his mother, who is referred to as having had some unfulfilled wishes about her son James and after her death the only thing left of her memory being a portrait that Hook has in his cabin. However, it is implied that she was hideously ugly and terrifying. Despite his fears of being killed and eaten by the crocodile, he does not fear death by any other means.
Smee (voiced by Ed Gilbert in an Irish accent, 64 episodes) is Hook's loyal first mate and the closest he has to a friend, although he rarely seems to appreciate it. Smee is of Irish descent and in his appearance small and slim, and has a beard. As created by Barrie as a weapon he carries his sword he calls Johnny Corcscrew. The main difference from the other pirates is that he is often clumsy and not really able to capture any of the Lost Boys. Despite all the confusion and his environment, it is important for him not to leave the pirate crew. He is faithful to his Captain and stays on his side, but not once can also be more equal to the other pirates.
The Pirate Crew is a group of pirates, various aged, all male gender, whose home address is the Jolly Roger. Even if not being completely pleased of the life they live, they are loyal to their Captain and would never leave him.
Robert Mullins (voiced by Jack Angel, 62 episodes)  who hails from Brooklyn. He is medium height, muscular, has a long face, a moustache and a scar at his left eye. He is very good in sword fight. He is very good in sword fighting and tends to clash with his leader more than anyone else on the ship. Although he refers to Captain Hook as "the finest pirate who ever lived", he sometimes schemes to take over command. However, he has no chance to become the leader, as Captain Hook is just too autonomous and powerful, and Mullins is never going to consider him. His biggest disadvantage is that he is deeply superstitious and prone to landsickness.
"Gentleman" Ignatious P. Starkey (voiced by David Shaughnessy, 62 episodes) is a foppish yet gentlemanly and English member of Hook's crew. He speaks with a "dash-it-all" accent, has a high physique, long black hair he wears in a ponytail and a thin moustache. He wears a long cape and as a weapon uses a rapier. He is believed to be the first mate and can become conceited and confident in himself. Similar to Mullins, not once also he overestimates himself and thinks to be able to be the Captain instead of Hook but. He can come into trouble, where he is not able to come out by himself and someone else must do this and also not once has no courage, so he admits that he is scared.
Alf Mason (voiced by Tony Jay, 57 episodes) is a member of Hook's crew who serves as a carpenter and strongman. He has a strong physical build, is tall, very muscular, has no hair, and wears a blue nightcap. As a weapon, Alf often wields a mallet. A big benefit is his strong build and physical strength, where the others, especially Peter's friends, have no chance to oppose him. Even so, he can become emotionally sensitive and shows his feelings.
Billy Jukes (voiced by Eugene Williams, 57 episodes) is The youngest pirate who is of Old World/Indian descent. Before he became a member of the pirates, he was a castaway on a desert island. Billy was rescued by Captain Hook's crew and taught pirating by Robert Mullins, to whom he is very loyal. As not being an adult as the other pirates, he is not well risen and has no facial hair. He is very slim, has dark skin and thick brunette hair that often conceals one eye. Despite his age, he is not excluded by the crew (certainly not as much as bosun Smee) and it's obvious that his main place is at the pirates. Being the ship's gunner, he is responsible for the cannons, so he is never far away from the big cannon, 'Long Tom'. He also has a wide knowledge at machines and other uncommon instruments and is the inventor among the pirate crew, what is a big feature he has in common with the Twins.
Eucrates Cookson (voiced by Jack Angel in a Greek accent, 56 episodes) is the ship's chef, who has his individual method for his dishes and menu. Instead of typical weapons, he can use kitchen devices and is very good at using a fishing net. He spends most of his time in the kitchen, where he can be seen cooking. As having his main place in the kitchen and a massive build, it usually comes out he doesn't take part at the action, where physical exercise is needed and generally disclaims going on land and when he leaves the Jolly Roger, his plans are finding some food. Not once his dishes are good not for eating, but for performing his own miracles.
Short Tom is a malicious parrot, Captain Hook's mischievous pet, which wears an eye-patch. He is capable of speaking but is limited to phrases taught to him. Frequently, he tries to alert the pirates when seeing Peter Pan sneaking aboard, but because of its limited speech usually fails to get Hook and the pirates to understand.
The Croc (19 episodes) is a big reptile, the same crocodile that had devoured Captain Hook's hand. She lives in her cave shaped like a crocodile's head and does not tolerate any kind of intruders. A ticking clock is heard every time the Croc is near. In the series, the clock is magical and controls the whole time of day in Neverland.The Indians - A tribe of Native Americans who reside in Neverland and often help out Peter Pan and the Lost Boys. Only three of them figure prominently in the series.
Great Big Little Panther (voiced by Michael Wise, 12 episodes) - The Indian chief and father of Tiger Lily and Hard-To-Hit. He is very wise and often assists Peter and his friends when they have problems.
Tiger Lily (voiced by Cree Summer, 5 episodes-main, 4 episodes-minor, 1 cameo - "Play Ball") - The daughter of Great Big Little Panther and big sister of Hard-To-Hit. She and her little brother sometimes tag along with and aid Peter and their other friends on their many adventures. She is physically active and regularly finds it unnecessary to take a risk, showing she is more mature. Together with her brother, they love having fun. However, they also know and recognize when the situation is more serious and act in a more mature way.
Hard-to-Hit (voiced by Aaron Lohr, 6 episodes-main, 5 episodes-minor, 1 cameo - "Play Ball") - Great Big Little Panther's son and Tiger Lily's younger brother. He knows the weapons of his tribe and how to use them. Generally, he gets accompanied by his sister and is less mature, but even though it is all obvious for him to treat her more gentle as a girl. He can become very stubborn and then just want to reach his goal no matter what!
Spirit Guide (2 episodes) - A panther that is invoked by Great Big Little Panther to guide Peter during the storm to recover the magic sand.
Little Panther - an ancestor of the Native Americans who once took care to calm down the argument of the sun and the moon and their chaos of day and night this two creatures had caused.
The Mermaids - A group of young women, who are half human and half fish. They live in the Mermaids' Lagoon. They arere vain and care for their looks and good appearance. They enjoy playing, joking and having fun and collecting items from the land. From all the humans who live above the water they only like Peter and no one else. Like Tinker Bell and the fairies, the Mermaids are magical. Their singing can hypnotize and lure men to their doom, conjure bubbles which sink or float, make bubbles big enough to supply air for or trap humans, command tides, conjure water spouts, and manipulate water in other ways.
The Mermaid Trio - Three mermaids, two brunettes with dark skin, where one has a darkpink and the other a violet fishtail and one mermaid with light skin, short strawberry blonde hair and cyan fins. They all care for Peter and like playing around only with him, the other humans they don't accept. They love to dress themselves up with shining jewels.
Crooked Tail (voiced by Linda Gary, 2 episodes-main, 2 episodes-minor) - A mermaid who once was beautiful, but conceited and haughty until a potion to enhance her beauty went horribly awry turning her into a green-skinned mermaid. She is friendly not only to Peter but also likes the other humans. She has a very determined personality why other strong individuals have no chance to resist against her. That's why she is feared by the Purple and Blue Mermaids.
The Blonde and Redhead Mermaids (2 episodes) - Two mermaids who only appear twice as villains in the series. While they are usually seen together, they often insult each other and both are very vain.
Captain Patch (voiced by Ed Gilbert, 2 episodes) – aka Jasper Hook is the older brother of James Hook who once served as his midshipman. Hook took out Jasper's left eye years ago when Jasper would not give James a bigger share of their loot. Ever since he has worn an eyepatch, which is why he is known as Captain Patch. Presumably Patch died not long afterwards, and his chest of treasures somehow ended up hidden in a cave in Neverland with a curse.
Alde Baran (1 episode-main, 4 episodes-minor) - A white dwarf, who works with miniature-horses and has magical boots. A good friend of Tinker Bell.
Olook (voiced by Jack Angel, 5 episodes) - A grumpy giant troll who lives in his big cave with a secret entrance, has an own library, is able do special troll-magic and interested in valuable items.The Girl in the Moon (voiced by Kath Soucie, 2 episodes-main, 1 mentioned: "Jules Verne Night") - a blonde girl in a turquoise dress who is responsible for bringing the night by replacing the sun that appears during the day with the moon at the normal time. When any problems arise and the day and night cannot appear normally as the result the normal daytime loses its balance. She appears in the episodes "Now day party" and "The girl who lives in the moon".
Django - A gipsy dwarf who is a showman. He is good friends with Alde Baran.
Nico (2 episodes-main, 1 episode-minor, 1 cameo - "The Neverscroll") - a wolf that Wendy claims she first saw in her dreams and after she meets him for real, knows immediately that he belongs to her. Nico does not live in a pack, but is independent.
Wherever (2 episodes-main, 2 mentioned: "Now Day Party", "Lost Memories of Pirate Pan") - a big and powerful spirit. He appears when somebody loses something to take possession of this lost object and then brings it to his big caverns that are located deep under the sea. He appears in the episodes "After the laughter" and "Footrace".
King Kyros (voiced by Jack Angel) - the Ice King of Neverland. He owns a giant ice cave with many corridors and tunnels and has some elves as his subworkers. In fact, King Kyros is not one of the bad guys. The conflict with him was started by Peter, who just entered the King's home without any permission and took away one of his crystals claiming it was his own. He appears in the episode "Coldest Cut of All".
Jack O' Lantern - a ghost which revives in Halloween, where he can leave the cave he is imprisoned, when somebody steals some important items from them that must be left inside. He appears in the episode "All Hallow's Eve".
Jane - Wendy's daughter from the future. She has long brown hair and wears her nightdress. She appears in the episode "Lost memories of pirate Pan".
Forget-Me-Not - a fairy who appears in the episode "Lost memories of pirate Pan".
Frau Brumhandel - a valkyrie who appears in the episode "Frau Brumhandel".
King Oberon - the king of the fairies. He appears in the episode "A wee problem".
Queen Gloriana - the queen of the fairies. She appears in the episode "A wee problem".
The Dragon - a big creature which is resurrected by a key and appears, that can be only pulled out by a patient person. It is very sensitive and gets angry when being disturbed, but in fact isn't a bad creature and prefers to rest in peace than to fight.
Ratatat - a little stone gnome which is discovered by the Lost Boys while they are cleaning the Underground House. He comes to life and orders them to leave, so he goes to the Jolly Rodger to help Hook and pirates find them. He appears in the episode "Evicted".
Cecilia - Hook's ex bethrothed. She appears in the episode "Hook's Christmas".
Fairy of the Monday Island (3 episodes, 1 cameo - "Wee Problem") - a blonde fairy who watches that no one sneaks into the fair. She has some wider knowledge about Neverland, it's obvious for her, that Peter Pan and this magic island are connected to each other.
The Never Master - An ancient wizard with a staff. The ancient text of a book explains how to ask the Never Star for three wishes, from which the magician leaves to grant them.The following show the differences from J.M. Barrie's book or other Peter Pan versions:
This series does not feature an introduction to the Darling family, who lives in the real world in London, nor explains how Peter takes Wendy to Neverland.
There is no explanation of how the lost boys came to neverland, the viewer just knows from the first episode, that Tootles got lost before Nibs and with Tootles also some boys more, but who exactly is unknown.
There is no ending so the ultimate fate of the Lost Boys is unknown, if they get adopted by the Darling parents or stay in Neverland as they wish to keep their eternal youth and childhood and be with Peter forever.
This series has no chronology and is shown in a weird order. The episode "The Girl who lives in the Moon" is shown before "Seven League Boots" or "The Ruby" before, "Vanity, thy Name is Mermaid", but it should be the other way, as it gets accentuated the events of the later episode are taking place before the earlier episode. There is no episode to have a clear accentuation to be the last one.
Peter always wears his knife attached to his right boot, not on his waist.
Tinker Bell speaks the same language as the other characters, not a tinkling of bells.
Generally, Captain Hook's hair is either black or brown. Here, it is white.
Captain Hook does not panic when hearing the ticking of a clock, and his behavior is inconsistent.
John wears a brown derby, not a black stovepipe hat.
In most adaptations, Wendy is portrayed blonde and has the lightest hair color from her siblings, while John has generally the darkest. Here, Wendy with black hair has the darkest and John, being dark blond, the lightest hair colour from the Darling siblings.
The Twins are not identical but dizygotic and look very different. One is short and Caucasian, the other is taller and clearly African. They are recognized as twins by wearing similar caps and doing everything together.
The Lost Boys wear normal clothes and caps from animals' heads.
In the other adaptations, in Neverland, only Peter is well-known for his flying abilities. With other children, it's different. In this version all his closest friends, the Darling siblings and the Lost Boys, also can fly all the time.Michael Bell - Voice Director
Lee Dannacher - Voice Director
Tony Pastor - Voice DirectorThe series originally aired on Fox from September 8, 1990 to September 10, 1991. Repeats continued to air until September 11, 1992. A repeat of the series' Christmas episode was aired on December 25, 1993. The series was then on Fox in re-run form on weekday mornings from November 4, 1996 to March 28, 1997. Reruns were then shown on Fox Family in 1998.
Before the series was even broadcast, on July 9, 1990, Fox made a presentation to approximately 225 television writers about the their upcoming Fall season line-up. The writers were particularly proud of this series.
Select episodes from the series were released on video in 1992. They have long been out of print. Titles of these included:
Select episodes were released on a single DVD for the UK market in 2004. This is now also out of print. Episodes released included:
Coldest Cut of All
River Of Night
Treasure Hunt
Wee Problem
The Girl Who Lives In The MoonA video game titled Peter Pan and the Pirates was released for the Nintendo Entertainment System by third party publisher THQ. The game was generally received poorly by critics.
In this single player side-scrolling action game, the player controlled Peter Pan, who could collect bags of fairy dust to fly and wielded a sword that boasted a short range. The player started out in the forest and was required to destroy all the pirates in each level to advance to the next, with the final goal of reaching the pirate ship and battling Captain Hook.
In addition to the TV Series a German imprint Bastei-Verlag, inter alia with the Turkish comic book artist Yalaz, released seven comics. They are originally German and tell new stories of the Fox Peter Pan and his closest friends.
The main titles of the comics and their stories, all with English translation:
1. Rettung für das Einhorn – Peter saves the Unicorn
Ein Piratenschiff geht fliegen – A Pirates' Ship takes Flight (note: a remake from the episode "The Rake")
Sturm über dem Niemalsland – Stormy Neverland
Tinkerbell sitzt in der Falle – Tink is trapped2. Das tickende Krokodil – The tickling Croc
Wer andern eine Grube gräbt ...  – Who digs a pit for others ... 
Die Jagd nach dem goldenen Stein – Hunting the golden Stone
Captain Hook geht baden – Captain Hook goes swimming3. Captain Hook und der Zauberring – Captain Hook and the Magic Ring
Captain Hook und der Zauberring – Captain Hook and the Magic Ring
Angeltour mit Hindernissen – Go fishing with obstacles
Reise in die Vergangenheit – Journey to the Past
Die verzauberte Statue – The enchanted Statue4. Die Hexe mit dem grünen Daumen – The Witch with the green Thumb
Die Hexe mit dem grünen Daumen – The Witch with the green Thumb
Alles wegen Ingwerbeeren – All 'coz of the Ginger Berries
Verrat im Nilpferdreich – Betrayal at the Hippopo-Empire
Tootles auf Abwegen – Tootles goes astray
Der falsche Peter – The wrong Peter5. Die Hexe lässt das Blitzen nicht – The Witch who did not stop Lightning
Die Hexe lässt das Blitzen nicht – The Witch who did not stop Lightning
Der Heiratsschwindler – The Wedding Swindler
Captain Hook hat Schwein – Hook and his Guinea Pigs
Ein Pirat und ein Gentleman – A Pirate and a Gentleman
Zaubern will gelernt sein – Doing Magic is to be learned6. Ein Ehrengast zieht Leine – A Special Guest goes away
Ein Ehrengast zieht Leine – A Special Guest goes away
Ein Monstervogel muckt auf – Rebel of a Monster Bird
Der Piratenausverkauf – Pirates' Sale
Captain Hook geht in die Falle – Hook gets trapped
Eis und heiß im Niemalsland – Hot'n Cold in Neverland7. Viel Radau beim Mädchenklau – Making this much Noise, the Girl has no Choice
Viel Radau beim Mädchenklau – Making this much Noise, the Girl has no Choice (note: story without Hook)
Ein Möhrchen zum anbeißen – To get a Nibble from the Carrot
Der Stein der vom Himmel fiel – The Stone from Sky (note: story without Hook)
Rettung für die Streithähne – Rescue of the Squabblers
Freitag der dreizehnte – Friday the Thirteenth (note: not to be mistaken with the episode from the series)It is emphasized that Peter Pan cannot read, however in the episode "Curly's Laugh", it is shown that the Lost Boys, except Slightly, can. In the comic series, Peter is not alone with this disability, but also all the six Lost Boys cannot read as well.
In the comics, only Peter is able to fly all the time, but his friends cannot always do this, as they are regularly seen walking and performing other activities, like being on the sea in a boat, which they would not do if they could fly. Sometimes it seems that they first obtained Tink's powder and at other times they seem to be really independent when flying, but not always.
For the Natives, only three have their appearances and roles in the series. The whole tribe is never introduced. But in the comics, they are more developed. Also when asking them for help, Tiger Lily has the biggest role and regularly accompanies Peter and the others, while Hard-to-Hit appears very rarely and does not get any role, except in one story ("Go fishing with obstacles"). There he also gets presented as being Lily's cousin. But in the TV series, he is her brother (which can be deduced in the episode "Count de Chauvin", where Panther says both of them are his children, so it is obvious Tiger Lily and Hard-to-Hit have the same father).
From the characters, the Twins are synchronized. When talking, they do it together, so one starts the sentence and the other finishes it or they speak in breaks, where one stops talking, but the other one goes on with the train. In the comics, they generally speak on their own. They are also known, as well as Billy Jukes, to be the mechanics and inventors in the series. But in the comics, none of them does this.
The animals are not able to speak normally and also aren't high developed as the humans, but just act naturally as animals do and are able to understand. In the comics, they also don't speak the human language. Yet they often get widely developed thoughts, especially the Croc, and are shown to be more intelligent, not as animals usually are in reality. The very same with Hook's parrot Short Tom, which in the comics regularly says full sentences with a big intelligence, which animals in fact don't have and this parrot neither does in the TV series.
In the TV series, there aren't many characters, especially not human beings, who have the ability of abstract thinking. In the comics, Neverland is more developed and also has not only more humans, but also cities and realms, where a lot people live.
Of all the Lost Boys, the Twins get the biggest physical appearance in the TV series. But in the comics, the Lost Boys who is seen in most of the stories and takes the biggest part at the action is Slightly.
In the series, Cookson is very fat and could always eat while Mason's biggest advantage is his muscular body type and his physical strength. But in the comics, Mason is fat and immovable, and gets criticized by Captain Hook for eating too much and being physically very lazy.
From Peter's friends, little Michael never has a teddy bear with him or any other cuddly toy (as it is in "Disney Peter Pan", "Peter Pan (2003)", "Peter Pan Live!", or some episodes of "The New Adventures of Peter Pan"). But in some comic stories, he does ("Hunting the golden Stone", "The Witch with the green Thumb").
In the series it never comes to any real love relationship between Peter and Wendy, just maybe a little in episode "The Play's the Thing" where it's a pity for Wendy (maybe a little for Peter, too) that while she's playing the main female character in Hamlet's tragedy, Juliet, Peter cannot be her Romeo. And in "Count the Chauvin" where Peter is praising Wendy for her courage and then kissing her hand, or better the glove she's wearing. But in the comics there is one story where Peter purposefully is taking Wendy to a place he wants to be romantic for the two of them ("The Wedding Swindler"). And in another Peter is catching Wendy, while she's falling down and after holding her in his arms, the two of them want to forget their current problem with Hook and to concentrate only on each other ("Go fishing with obstacles").Peter PanPeter Pan & the Pirates at the Big Cartoon DataBase
Fox's Peter Pan and the Pirates at IMDb