The 2010 Massachusetts gubernatorial election was held on November 2, 2010. Incumbent Democratic Governor Deval Patrick was re-elected to a second term.
Party primaries were held on September 14, though all four candidates ran unopposed in their respective primaries. Tim Murray, who ran on a ticket with Patrick, was re-elected Lieutenant Governor. As of 2022, this was the last time a Democrat was elected Governor of Massachusetts. This is also the last gubernatorial election in which the two major parties did not nominate a woman or had a female running mate on a gubernatorial ticket, and the only one since 1994.
Deval Patrick, incumbent GovernorGrace Ross, 2006 Green-Rainbow nominee for GovernorTim Murray, incumbent Lieutenant GovernorCharlie Baker, member of the Weld and Cellucci administrations and CEO of Harvard Pilgrim Health CareChristy Mihos, independent candidate for governor in 2006Kerry Healey, former Lieutenant Governor and 2006 nominee
Bob Hedlund, State Senator
Joe Malone,  former State Treasurer  (running for MA-10)
Michael Sullivan, former U.S. Attorney for the District of MassachusettsRichard Tisei, Minority Leader of the Massachusetts State SenateTim Cahill, State Treasurer and Receiver-General and former DemocratRunning mate: Paul Loscocco, former Republican State RepresentativeJill Stein, medical internist and co-chairperson of the Running mate: Richard P. Purcell, surgery clerk and ergonomics assessorOn October 1, 2010, Loscocco announced that he would withdraw from the race and endorse Republican candidate Charlie Baker.  Loscocco formally remained on the ballot, however. On October 7, Cahill filed a lawsuit against four former campaign aides, alleging that they conspired to undermine his candidacy and help Charlie Baker by arranging his defection. Cahill claimed that e-mails between Republican political consultants and Loscocco's top aide suggested that Loscocco may have been enticed to leave the ticket by future job promises. In response, Loscocco claimed that Cahill's top aide was coordinating strategy with the Patrick campaign and the Democratic Governors' Association and thus was never actually an independent effort.
Soon after Cahill filed suit against him, Adam Meldrum, Cahill's former campaign manager, alleged that Cahill colluded with the Massachusetts Lottery, which is overseen by the state treasurer's office, to run an ad favorable to him during the campaign. The ad, paid for by the Commonwealth, described the Massachusetts Lottery "the most successful state lottery America" and "consistently well-managed", echoing themes from Cahill's gubernatorial campaign. Both Cahill and Massachusetts Lottery Director Mark Cavanagh denied the allegations. On October 18, e-mails released in conjunction with Cahill's lawsuit appeared to reveal that the campaign attempted to have the Lottery air a series of ads that praised the lottery's management. In the e-mails, Cahill's campaign media strategist Dane Strother told Meldrum to "Get the Lottery immediately cutting a spot and get it up...Needs to focus on the Lottery being the best in the country and above reproach." Two days later, Cahill's senior adviser Scott Campbell wrote, "I think the first thing is to figure out what/where/how we want to do this ... with Lottery people."
On April 2, 2012, Cahill was indicted by a Grand Jury on charges that he used $1.65 million in Massachusetts State Lottery advertising to aid his campaign for governor. On December 12, 2012, a mistrial was declared in the corruption case after the jury failed to reach a verdict on two counts of conspiracy.
As of October 31, 2010.  Shading indicates candidate with the highest amount.
2009–2010 Massachusetts legislature
United States gubernatorial elections, 2010Massachusetts Secretary of the Commonwealth – Elections Division
Massachusetts Governor Candidates at Project Vote Smart
Campaign contributions for 2010 Massachusetts Governor from Follow the Money
Massachusetts Governor 2010 from OurCampaigns.com
Swanson, Emily (June 15, 2010). "2010 Massachusetts Gubernatorial General Election: Charlie Baker (R) vs Deval Patrick (D) vs Tim Cahill (i)". The Huffington Post. Retrieved October 24, 2010. (graph of multiple polls)
Election 2010: Massachusetts Governor from Rasmussen Reports
2010 Massachusetts Governor Race from Real Clear Politics
2010 Massachusetts Governor's Race from CQ Politics
Race Profile in The New York Times"Massachusetts Gubernatorial Debate". C-SPAN. September 24, 2010.
"The Massachusetts Gubernatorial Debate". WWLP. October 21, 2010. Archived from the original on August 20, 2011. Retrieved October 27, 2010.
"Final Mass. Governor's Debate". BostonChannel. October 25, 2010. Archived from the original on October 29, 2010. Retrieved October 27, 2010.Charlie Baker for Governor
Tim Cahill for Governor
Deval Patrick for Governor
Jill Stein for Governor