"Rosanna" is a song written by David Paich and performed by the American rock band Toto, the opening track and the first single from their 1982 album Toto IV. This song won the Grammy Award for Record of the Year at the 1983 ceremony. "Rosanna" was also nominated for the Song of the Year award. It is regarded for drummer Jeff Porcaro's half-time shuffle, commonly known as the "Rosanna shuffle".
The song reached number 2 on the Billboard Hot 100 for five consecutive weeks, behind "Don't You Want Me" by The Human League and "Eye of the Tiger" by Survivor. It was also one of the band's most successful singles in the UK, peaking at No. 12 on the UK Singles Chart and remaining on the chart for eight weeks.
The song was written by David Paich, who has said that the song is based on numerous girls he had known. As a joke, the band members initially played along with the common assumption that the song was based on Rosanna Arquette, who was dating Toto keyboard player Steve Porcaro at the time and coincidentally had the same name. Arquette herself played along with the joke, commenting in an interview that the song was about "my showing up at 4 a.m., bringing them juice and beer at their sessions." In the verses, the key is changed from G major to F major, accompanied on the original recording by the lead vocalist changing from Steve Lukather to Bobby Kimball.
The drum pattern is known as a "half-time shuffle", and shows "definite jazz influence", featuring ghost notes and derived from the combination of the Purdie shuffle, Led Zeppelin drummer John Bonham's shuffle on "Fool in the Rain", and the Bo Diddley beat. The Purdie shuffle can be prominently heard on Steely Dan's track "Home at Last" from Aja, which Jeff Porcaro cited as an influence.
The overlapping keyboard solos in the middle were created by David Paich and Steve Porcaro recording a multitude of keyboard lines (some of which were cut from the final recording) using a Micro-Composer, a Minimoog, Yamaha CS-80s, Prophets, a Hammond organ, and a GS1, among other instruments. Paich credits Porcaro with both coming up with the concept for the segment and playing a majority of the parts. The album version starts with the drum beat only then kicks into the rest of the melody, then ends with two renditions of the song's chorus and goes into a musical interlude and fades out from there. According to Lukather, this final instrumental section was a spontaneous jam during the recording session: "... the song was supposed to end but Jeff carried on and Dave started playing the honky-tonk piano and we all just followed on." The single edit goes right into the melody at the beginning, then the song fades out during the first singing of the chorus at the end.
Steve Porcaro and Lukather describe it as "the ultimate Toto track". Cash Box said that it "is a varied palette of pleasing pop shades."
The West Side Story-inspired video was directed by Steve Barron and set in a stylized urban streetscape, with Rosanna represented by a dancer whose bright red dress contrasts with the gray surroundings. The band plays within a chain-link fence enclosure. Cynthia Rhodes is featured as the lead dancer Rosanna, which led to her being cast in Staying Alive the following year. Patrick Swayze was also uncredited as a dancer in the music video and he and Rhodes would both star in the movie Dirty Dancing.
Despite not playing on the actual recording, new bassist Mike Porcaro (brother of Jeff and Steve) appears in the video, as original Toto bass player David Hungate left before the video was made. Lenny Castro is also featured with the band as a percussionist.
TotoDavid Paich – synthesizers, piano, Hammond organ, backing vocals, horn arrangements
Steve Lukather – lead and backing vocals, guitar
Bobby Kimball – lead and backing vocals
Jeff Porcaro – drums
Steve Porcaro – synthesizers, Hammond organ
David Hungate – bassGuest musiciansLenny Castro – percussion, conga
Tom Scott – saxophone
Jim Horn – saxophone
Gary Grant – trumpet
Jerry Hey – trumpet and horn arrangements
James Pankow – trombone
Tom Kelly – backing vocal



Weekly charts[edit]


Chart (1982/1983)

Peakposition


Australian Kent Music Report

16


Austrian Top 40

11


Belgian Singles Chart

22


Canadian RPM Adult Contemporary Tracks

7


Canadian RPM Top Singles

4


Dutch Singles Chart

3


Europarade

20


French Singles Chart

46


German Singles Chart

24


Irish Singles Chart

11


Italian Singles Chart

12


New Zealand Singles Chart

22


Norwegian Singles Chart

2


South African Singles Chart

3


Spanish Radio Chart

31


Swiss Singles Chart

3


U.K. Singles Chart

12


U.S. Billboard Hot 100

2


U.S. Billboard Adult Contemporary

17


U.S. Billboard Top Rock Tracks

8



Year-end charts[edit]


Chart (1982)

Rank


US Top Pop Singles (Billboard)

14


South African Singles Chart

15


Canadian RPM Top Singles

27


Italian Singles Chart

30


Dutch Top 40

31


Australian Kent Music Report

74

All-time charts[edit]


Chart (1958-2018)

Position


US Billboard Hot 100

480

Sales and certifications[edit]




Region

Certification
Certified units/sales


Australia (ARIA)

Gold

35,000


Canada (Music Canada)

Gold

50,000


United Kingdom (BPI)

Silver

200,000


United States (RIAA)

Platinum

1,000,000



 Shipments figures based on certification alone. Sales+streaming figures based on certification alone.




In 2018, American rock band Weezer released a cover of the track to poke fun at an attempt by fans to get them to cover "Africa", another song by Toto. Weezer went on to release a cover of "Africa" five days later.
The song is featured in the Season 4 episode of The Middle titled "The Hose".
Lyrics on official Toto website
MusicStack information