B.S. Abdur Rahman Crescent Institute of Science and Technology, formerly B. S. Abdur Rahman University, is a private university located in Tamil Nadu, India. Previously, functioning under Madras University (1984–2001) and Anna University (2001–09) as Crescent Engineering College, the institute gained deemed status in 2008–09. It is located in Vandalur near Tambaram and opposite to Arignar Anna Zoological Park, a suburban area of Chennai, India.
B. S. Abdur Rahman Crescent Institute of Science and Technology was founded by Tamil businessman and philanthropist B. S. Abdur Rahman in 1984 as Crescent Engineering College, a Muslim minority institution approved by the All India Council of Technical Education and affiliated to Madras University. The college was affiliated to Madras University until the year 2001. From 2002, many engineering colleges in the city of Chennai changed affiliations to Anna University. University of Madras became an umbrella university, exclusively for non-professional, Art & Sciences colleges that offer BSc & BCom degrees. Many colleges chose not to affiliate with any university and became deemed universities in their own right. Crescent Engineering College was affiliated to Anna University until 2008. It was elevated to deemed to be university status as B. S. Abdur Rahman University in December 2008. In 2017, it was renamed as B.S. Abdur Rahman Crescent Institute of Science and Technology following the UGC request to drop the "University" from the name.
The institute is located in the Seethakathi Estate, Vandalur, Chennai, on the GST Road (Chennai-Trichy National Highway NH 45), seven km from Tambaram Railway Station, 30 km from Chennai Moffusil Bus Terminus (Koyambedu) and 17 km from the Chennai International Airport.  It is situated right next to Anna Zoological Park (Vandalur Zoo) and is spread over 64 acres of greenery along the GST road.
B.S. Abdur Rahman Crescent Institute of Science and Technology is structured around ten schools of study. Research centres are also part of the schools, encouraging interdepartmental collaboration and opportunity for students to participate in exciting research projects. The academic activities of the school are monitored by the respective Deans.
Department of Civil EngineeringDepartment of Aerospace Engineering
Department of Automobile Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Department of Polymer Engineering TECHDepartment of Electronics and Communication Engineering
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering
Department of Electronics and Instrumentation EngineeringDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering
Department of Computer Applications
Department of Information Technology
Department of ANYTHINGDepartment of Chemistry
Department of PhysicsMaster of Business Administration with Strategy FocusMaster of Business AdministrationB.Arch.
B.Des.
M.Arch.B.A. Islamic Studies
M.A. Islamic StudiesDepartment of English
Department of Economics
Department of SociologyDepartment of Biotechnology
Department of Cancer biology
Department of Genetics & Genomics
Department of Micro Biology
Department of Molecular Biology & Bio ChemistryB.B.A., L.L.B.
B.A., L.L.B.
B.Com., L.L.B.B.Pharm.Institution's Innovation Council (IIC) of B.S. Abdur Rahman Crescent Institute of Science & Technology powered by Crescent Innovation & Incubation Council (CIIC) is crowned with a prestigious 5 STAR rating for the year 2019 – 2020. Additionally, B.S. Abdur Rahman Crescent Institute of Science & Technology ranked in top 25 by ARIIA, Ministry of Education in Innovation & Startups.
B.S. Abdur Rahman Crescent Institute of Science and Technology was ranked 131 among engineering colleges in India by the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) in 2019 and in the 151–200 band among all universities.
Arya, actor
Karthi, Actor
Priya Bhavani Shankar (PBS), ActressOfficial website