The Faculty of Economics is one of the constituent departments of the University of Cambridge. It is composed of five research groups, in macroeconomics, microeconomic theory, economic history, econometrics, and empirical microeconomics. It is located in the Sidgwick Site in Cambridge, has been host to many distinguished economists, and is regarded as the birthplace of macroeconomics. 19 students or members of the faculty have won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences.
The Faculty of Economics was first created by Alfred Marshall in 1903, although the first notable Cambridge economist is considered to be Thomas Malthus. After Marshall, the faculty was home to Alfred Pigou, father of public economics, John Hicks, who pioneered the IS-LM model and general equilibrium theory, and John Maynard Keynes, father of modern macroeconomics. The faculty retained a strong Keynesian bend in its thinking well into the late 20th century.
Today, the faculty offers one undergraduate course, the economics tripos, and five graduate programs: an advanced diploma in economics, master of philosophy degrees (MPhil) in economics, economic research, and finance and economics, and a PhD in economics.
The undergraduate course is taught over the course of three years. In Part I, all students take the same five courses: microeconomics, macroeconomics, quantitative methods in economics, social and political aspects of economics, and British economic history. In the later two years, students continue to take courses in macroeconomics and microeconomics with more freedom to choose additional courses, and all students write a dissertation in their third year.
Ha-Joon Chang (Robinson)
Giancarlo Corsetti (Clare)
Sir Partha Dasgupta (St. John's)
Sanjeev Goyal (Christ's)
Tony Lawson (Emmanuel)
Oliver Linton (Trinity)
Murray Milgate (Trinity/Queens')
David Newbery (Trinity)
M. Hashem Pesaran (Trinity)
Robert Rowthorn (King's)R. G. D. Allen (Sidney Sussex)
Kenneth Arrow (Churchill)
Andrew Bailey (Queens')
Rowland Baring, 3rd Earl of Cromer (Trinity)
Peter Thomas Bauer (Caius)
Charlie Bean (Emmanuell)
David Bensusan-Butt (King's)
Christopher Bliss (King's)
D. G. Champernowne (King's/Trinity)
Robert Chote (Queens')
Cameron Cobbold, 1st Baron Cobbold (King's)
John James Cowperthwaite (Christ's)
Walter Cunliffe, 1st Baron Cunliffe (Trinity)
Angus Deaton (Fitzwilliam), Nobel Prize winner
Gérard Debreu (Churchill), Nobel Prize winner
Peter Diamond (Churchill)), Nobel Prize winner
Maurice Dobb (Pembroke/Trinity)
John Eatwell, Baron Eatwell (Queens')
Robert Fogel (Trinity), Nobel Prize winner
Milton Friedman (Caius), Nobel Prize winner
John Kenneth Galbraith (Trinity)
Pierangelo Garegnani (Trinity)
Sir Edward George (Emmanuel)
Anthony Giddens (King's)
Sir Gilbert Heathcote, 1st Baronet (Christ's)
Oliver Hart (King's/Churchill), Nobel Prize winner
Noreena Hertz (King's)
John Hicks (Caius), Nobel Prize winner
John C. Hull
Richard Kahn (King's)
John Maynard Keynes (King's)
Mervyn King (King's/St. John's)
Patrick Lynch (Peterhouse)
Thomas Malthus (Jesus)
Alfred Marshall (St. John's)
Eric Maskin (Darwin)
James Meade (Trinity), Nobel Prize winner
James Mirrlees (Trinity), Nobel Prize winner
Robert Neild (Trinity)
William Nordhaus (Clare Hall), Nobel Prize winner
Montagu Norman, 1st Baron Norman (King's)
Douglass North (Girton), Nobel Prize winner
Luigi Pasinetti (King's)
Arthur Cecil Pigou (King's)
Rogelio Ramírez de la O (Fitzwilliam)
Frank P. Ramsey (Magdalene/Trinity/King's)
Gordon Richardson (Caius)
Dennis Robertson (Trinity)
Austin Robinson (Sidney Sussex)
Joan Robinson (Girton/Newnham/King's)
Amartya Sen (Trinity), Nobel Prize winner and former Master of Trinity
Ajit Singh (Queens')
Piero Sraffa (Trinity)
Joseph Stiglitz (Caius/Fitzwilliam), Nobel Prize winner
Richard Stone (Caius/King's), Nobel Prize winner
Geoff Whitty (St. John's)
Yuen Pau Woo
Stefanie Stantcheva
Adam Tooze (King's)
Sheilagh Ogilvie (Trinity)Marshall Library of Economics