Education in Greece is centralized and governed by the Ministry of Education and Religious Affairs (Greek: Υπουργείο Παιδείας και Θρησκευμάτων, Υ.ΠΑΙ.Θ.) at all grade levels. The Ministry exercises control over public schools, formulates and implements legislation, administers the budget, coordinates national level university entrance examinations, sets up the national curriculum, appoints public school teaching staff, and coordinates other services.
The national supervisory role of the Ministry is exercised through Regional Unit Public Education Offices, which are named Regional Directorates of Primary and Secondary School Education. Public schools and their supply of textbooks are funded by the government. Public schools in Greece are tuition-free and students on a state approved list are provided textbooks at no cost.
About 25% of postgraduate programs are tuition-fee, while about 30% of students are eligible to attend programs tuition-free based on individual criteria.
Formal education in Greece comprises three educational stages. The first stage of formal education is the primary stage, which lasts for six years starting at age of 6 and ending at the age of 12, followed by the secondary stage, which is separated into two sub-stages: the compulsory Gymnasium, which lasts three years starting at age 12, and non-compulsory Lyceum, which lasts three years starting at 15. The third stage involves higher education.
School holidays in Greece include Christmas, Greek Independence Day, Easter, National Anniversary Day, a three-month summer holiday, National Public Holidays, and local holidays, which vary by region such as the local patron saint's day.
In addition to schooling, the majority of students attend extracurricular private classes at private tutoring centres called "frontistiria" (φροντιστήρια, frontistirio), or one-to-one tuition. These centres prepare students for higher education admissions, like the Pan-Hellenic Examinations, and/or provide foreign language education.
It is forbidden by law for students to use mobile phones while on the school premises. Taking or making phone calls, texting, or the use of other camera, video or other recording devices or medium that have image and audio processing ability like smartwatches is forbidden. Students must switch off their mobile phones or set them to silent mode and keep them in their bags while on the school premises. However, especially at high schools, the use of mobile phones is widespread, especially at breaks and sometimes in the class.
Most preschools, also known as pre-primary, are attached to and share buildings with a primary school. Preschool is compulsory and lasts 2 years, split into 1 year of Pre-kindergarten (Προνηπιαγωγείο) and 1 year of Kindergarten (Νηπιαγωγείο; Nipiagogeio). Since the school year 2018–2019, children who would be four years of age by December 31 are required to begin attending preschool on September 11 of the same year. Applications for registration and enrolment are usually carried out annually during fifteen consecutive days in May. After this period expires, students are neither allowed to register nor enroll.
1st Year / Pre-Kindergarten (Προνηπιαγωγείο), age 4 to 5 years old (with some 3 year olds, about to turn 4, attending)
2nd Year / Kindergarten (Νηπιαγωγείο), age 5 to 6 (with some 4 year olds, about to turn 5, attending)There are also the public Special Preschools and public Experimental Preschools (Πειραματικά Νηπιαγωγεία)
Primary school (Δημοτικό σχολείο, Dimotiko sxoleio) is compulsory for 6 years.
There is also the public Special Primary and public Experimental Primary (Πειραματικό Δημοτικό).
In Year 1 and Year 2, students are not officially graded. Grading begins in Year 3, and written exams are introduced in Year 5. Automatic progression exists from the one year to the next year. The school year starts on September 11 and ends on June 15. The school day starts at 08:15 and finishes at 13:15. It comprises six academic years of schooling named τάξεις (grades), numbered 1 through to 6. Enrollment to the next tier of compulsory education, the Gymnasium, is automatic. The classes for a subject vary with the teacher who teaches. Students are awarded an "Απολυτήριο Δημοτικού" (Apolytirio Dimotikou, primary school leaving certificate) which gives automatic admission to the lower secondary education (gymnasium). Αges are typical and can vary with the most common ages approximately: 




Grades of Primary School
Grade 1–6 

1st Year / First grade (Πρώτη τάξη δημοτικού), age 6 to 7-year-olds
2nd Year / Second grade (Δευτέρα τάξη δημοτικού), age 7 to 8
3rd Year / Third grade (Τρίτη τάξη δημοτικού), age 8 to 9
4th Year / Fourth grade (Τετάρτη τάξη δημοτικού), age 9 to 10
5th Year / Fifth grade (Πέμπτη τάξη δημοτικού), age 10 to 11
6th Year / Sixth grade (Έκτη τάξη δημοτικού), age 11 to 12


Grading System
Main article: Academic grading in Greece
1st Year: no grade points
2nd Year: no grade points
3rd Year: Α–Δ (A–D)
4th Year: Α–Δ (A–D)
5th Year: 1–10
6th Year: 1–10


Primary School National Curriculum
Gymnasium (Γυμνάσιο, Gimnasio, Lower Secondary Education School, Junior High School) is compulsory until the age of 15.
Article 16, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution of 1975 mandates that compulsory education must be at least nine years in length. 
This constitutional provision, which applies to all Greek children, was established in Law 309/1976, which also replaced classical Greek (katharevousa) with modern Greek (dimotiki) as the official language for teaching at all levels of education, and ceased to be a one-tier non-compulsory six years lower and upper secondary school named gymnasium (pupils aged 12–18), and was converted to compulsory three-year lower secondary school for students aged 12–15 named gymnasium and three-year non-compulsory upper secondary school for students aged 15–18 named lyceum.
Admitted students can be up to 16-years-old, and they must have Primary Education School Certificate or its international equivalent. No entry exams are required. Schooling starts on September 11 and ends on early June before the first day of the Pan-Hellenic Examinations. The lessons end on May 31 so that the students will be able to study for their examinations in early June. The gymnasium school-awarded qualification "Απολυτήριο Γυμνασίου" (Apolytirio Gymnasium, gymnasium school leaving certificate, referred to simply as gymnasium certificate) at HQF (NQF) level 3, gives admission to the upper secondary education (lyceum). Gymnasium has three academic years of schooling known as "τάξη" (grade), numbered 1 through to 3. Ages are typical and can vary with the most common being between:
1st Year / First grade (Πρώτη τάξη γυμνασίου), age 12 to 13-year-olds
2nd Year / Second grade (Δευτέρα τάξη γυμνασίου), age 13 to 14
3rd Year / Third grade (Τρίτη τάξη γυμνασίου), age 14 to 15The types of gymnasium in Greece are:

Gymnasium
Special Gymnasium
Evening Gymnasium
Ecclesiastical Gymnasium
Gymnasium of Cross-Cultural Education
Model Gymnasium (public; to enter, students must pass certain written examinations)
Experimental Gymnasium (public; students are selected randomly)
Integrated Special Vocational Gymnasium-Lyceum (ΕΝ.Ε.Ε.ΓΥ.-Λ; 4 years for the gymnasium)
Music Gymnasium (to enter this type of school students must pass certain musical exams)
Art Gymnasium (to enter this type of school students must pass certain exams on either arts, dance, or theater; 2004–Present)

Gymnasium National Curriculum
Second Chance Adult School (SDE; Σχολείο Δεύτερης Ευκαιρίας; Σ.Δ.Ε.) is a Gymnasium level equivalent evening school administrated by Ministry of Education, for adults who do not have complete the lower secondary education (gymnasium) lasts two-year with 25 hours per week.
Lyceum (Λύκειο, Lykeio, Upper Secondary Education School, Senior High School: the US term for upper secondary school) is non-compulsory education lasting 3 years.
Lyceum school starts on September 11 and ends on June 15. Lessons end in late May so that the students will be able to study for their examinations in June, although in 2020 and 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the extensive periods of online lessons, they didn't take place and the school year was extended to 11 June. Admitted students can be up to 20-year-old, while they must have Gymnasium Certificate or Lower Secondary Education School Certificate or its international equivalent. The Evening Lyceum (Εσπερινό) is for both adult students and underage working students lasts 3 years. After having completed the 3rd grade, the graduates of the Lyceum are awarded the "Απολυτήριο Λυκείου" qualification (Apolytirio Lykeiou, Lyceum Apolytirio, upper secondary leaving certificate, high school diploma, referred to simply as lyceum certificate) at HQF(NQF) / EQF level 4, at ISCED level 3. The marking scale on the Apolytirio Lykeiou (GPA) is set to a 20-point grading system, law 4610/2019. The Lyceum Apolytirio is required for admission to Higher Education and to continue studies, and is an equivalent in level to the GCE Advanced Level.
Students wishing to access study programmes in Higher Education must be both secondary education school graduates (lyceum or its equivalent) holding Apolytirio Lykeiou (lyceum certificate or its equivalent) and must take nationally set examinations officially entitled "Πανελλαδικές Εξετάσεις" (Pan-Hellenic Examinations, Panelladikes Eksetaseis) which is an externally assessed national standardized test given one time in any given school year, which also accept all adult ages for candidates. Apolytirio certificate grants the right to pursue entry to higher education at a later date by participating at the Pan-Hellenic Examinations. Ministry of Education bears the responsibility for the central organization of these matriculation examinations. Candidates exam in 4 subjects that have selected from the 3rd grade of lyceum, while different numerical value titled "συντελεστής βαρύτητας" (coefficient weight) has assigned to each of those subjects contributes differently towards the overall score.
Successful admission is determined through the combination of a) "Βαθμός Πρόσβασης", literally "the access score", that is the candidate's weighted average of the grades achieved in examinations, b) the candidate's "Βαθμός Προαγωγής και Απόλυσης" Β.Π.Α. represents the student's sum of all three Grade Point Average (GPA) earned in 1st, 2nd, 3rd Grade of lyceum each of these is multiplied by a given coefficient weight where the result is divided by two, Β.Π.Α. = (1st Grade GPA × 0.4 + 2nd Grade GPA × 0.7 + 3rd Grade GPA × 0.9) / 2, c) the candidate's "μηχανογραφικό δελτίο" (michanografiko deltio, application form) in which it states its preferences for the higher education institutions by priority order, d) the available number of places allocated in each academic department. The number of students that are admitted for each programme is determined annually by the Ministry of Education. As there are usually more applicants than places available in certain fields of study, students with the highest average exam results are selected, e) For admission to programmes requiring specialised knowledge or skills, special admission examinations are require in one or more certain subjects (such as fine arts, architecture, music studies, foreign languages, and others) or compulsory preparatory tests (such as medical assessment, fitness, sports, psychometric). "Βεβαίωση Πρόσβασης" (Vevaiosi Prosvasis, Access to Higher Education Certificate) is a document given to students soon after Pan-Hellenic Examinations results are released.
Lyceum designates school class levels based on the years of schooling of the student cohort, using 3 academic year levels, known as "τάξη" (grade), numbered 1 through to 3. Ages are typical and can vary with the most common being are between: 
1st Year / First grade (Πρώτη τάξη λυκείου), age 15 to 16-year-olds
2nd Year / Second grade (Δευτέρα τάξη λυκείου), age 16 to 17
3rd Year / Third grade (Τρίτη τάξη λυκείου), age 17 to 18The types of lyceum (Λύκειο) in Greece are:

Ειδικό Λύκειο (Eidiko Lykeio; Special Lyceum)
Μουσικό Λύκειο (Mousiko Lykeio; Music Lyceum; 1988–Present)(to enter, students must pass certain exams on a musical instrument)
Πρότυπο Λύκειο (Protipo Lykeio; Model Lyceum [public]; 2015–Present)(to enter, students must pass certain written examinations)
Καλλιτεχνικό Λύκειο (Kalitexniko Lykeio; Art Lyceum; 2006–Present)(to enter, students must pass certain exams on either arts, dance, or theater)
Γενικό Λύκειο (ΓΕΛ; Geniko Lykeio; General Lyceum; 1976–1996, 2006–Present)
Πειραματικό Λύκειο (Peiramtiko Lykeio; Experimental Lyceum [public]; 2015–Present)(to enter, students must pass certain written examinations)
Γενικό Λύκειο Διαπολιτισμικής Εκπαίδευσης (ΓΕΛΔΕ; i.e. comprehensive lyceum type; Diapolitismiko Lykeio; General Lyceum of Cross-Cultural Education; 2018–Present)
Eπαγγελματικό Λύκειο (ΕΠΑΛ; Epagelmatiko Lykeio; Vocational Lyceum; EPAL; 2006–Present)
Εσπερινό Επαγγελματικό Λύκειο (Esperino Epagelmatiko Lykeio; Evening Vocational Lyceum)
Εσπερινό Γενικό Λύκειο (Esperino Geniko Lykeio; Evening General Lyceum; 1976–Present)
Γενικό Εκκλησιαστικό Λύκειο (ΓΕΕΛ; Ekklisiastiko Lykeio; Ecclesiastical General Lyceum; 2006–Present)
Ενιαίο Ειδικό Επαγγελματικό Γυμνάσιο-Λύκειο (ΕΝ.Ε.Ε.ΓΥ-Λ; Integrated Special Vocational Gymnasium-Lyceum; 4 years for the lyceum)

General Lyceum (GEL; Γενικό Λύκειο; ΓΕ.Λ.; Geniko Lykeio).
It awarded "Απολυτήριο Γενικού Λυκείου" (Apolytirio Genikou Lykeiou, General Lyceum Apolytirio, General Lyceum Certificate, Upper Secondary Leaving Certificate, General High School Diploma). It can be awarded in Orientation Groups requiring an advanced level in a number of four different subjects (advanced level subjects, or also known as high level subjects), depending on the group. The second-grade students must choose one out of the two academic tracks named "Ομάδες Προσανατολισμού" (Orientation Groups), and the third-grade students one out of the three Orientation Groups. The Orientation Group is also known as Stream. Once it has selected a Stream it needs to follow a sequence of subjects to complete it. If they wish, graduating students are eligible to exam in Pan-Hellenic Examinations on four subjects of their chosen third-grade Orientation Group.
Vocational Lyceum (EPAL; Επαγγελματικό Λύκειο; ΕΠΑ.Λ.; Epagelmatiko Lykeio).
EPAL programme of study is designed in relation to the European Credit System for Vocational Education and Training (ECVET) and International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO).
The EPAL has dual-diploma (also known as double-diploma)  studies comprises two separate programmes taken in parallel earning, both, two separate qualifications in their own right, a "Απολυτήριο Επαγγελματικού Λυκείου" (Apolytirio Epagelmatikou Lykeiou; Vocational Lyceum Apolytirio; Vocational Lyceum Diploma; i.e. High School Diploma; Upper Secondary Leaving Certificate) and a "Πτυχίο Επαγγελματικής Εκπαίδευσης και Κατάρτισης, Επιπέδου 4" (Ptychio of Vocational Education and Training at HQF (NQF) level 4; i.e. Diploma of Vocational Education and Training at HQF (NQF) level 4; also is called Specialisation Diploma or Specialised Diploma). EPAL High School Diploma can be awarded in Orientation Groups (specialisations or streams) requiring an advanced level in a number of four different subjects (advanced level subjects, or also known as high level subjects), depending on the group.
The Grade 2 students must choose one of nine Orientation Groups, also known as "τομείς" sectors (penultimate year). The Grade 3 students must choose one of varying specialisations (or specialties) titled "ειδικότητες" (final year, specialties corresponding those orientation groups offered in Grade 2). The chosen orientation group at the Grade 2 it is cannot switch at Grade 3. The Grade 2 subjects contributes only to the half of a full Grade 3 Specialty, and do not constitute a separate qualification. Until a maximum age up to 20-year-old lyceum graduates are exempted from all core subjects from Grades 2 and 3 of the EPAL lyceum and they can be directly admitted to EPAL Grade 2, meaning these students when will graduate, it will only be awarded EPAL Specialisation Diploma.
EPAL High School Diploma is required for admission to Higher Education Institutes (HEIs) and to continue studies, and is an equivalent in level to the GCE Advanced Level. Students normally select their chosen Specialty in fields relevant to intended study at the higher education, and in Pan-Hellenic Examinations, if they wish, exam in 4 advanced level subjects of the Grade 3.
"Πτυχίο" is transliterated to "Ptychio" (Greek: Πτυχίο; Ptychio in dhimotiki from 1976–present; or defunct Πτυχίον; Ptychion in polytonic, katharevousa up until 1976). The Greek word "Πτυχίο" has translation into English as "Degree", it is a qualification term has common meaning in Greece. It signifies that it is a direct translation from the terminology in Greek as it appears in the Greek legislation. In Greece, the word "Πτυχίο" is commonly used for titles of study from different education levels (secondary, higher etc.). It must not confuse with its usage in the English language, whereby the word Degree refers to Higher Education qualification title only. Greece Universities' Degree is titled "Πτυχίο", transliterated to "Ptychio", signifies that it is a University Ptychio, Higher Education Ptychio, Level 6 Ptychio. EPAL Diploma of Vocational Education and Training at HQF level 4 standalone parchment is an Upper Secondary Education Ptychio, Level 4 Ptychio.
EPAL graduates have the option to choose Post-lyceum Year Apprenticeship Class ("Mathitia") by which it can upgrade the EPAL Diploma of Vocational Education and Training at HQF level 4 (Level 4 Ptychio) to Level 5. During the year, the students are working for 4 days in a workplace receiving stipend and attend 1 day at school classes. Since 2021–2022 academic year, the Post-lyceum Year Apprenticeship Class graduates having Diploma of Vocational Education and Training at level 5, after successful specific entrance examinations (κατατακτήριες εξετάσεις), allows to them admission into the Higher Education (level 6) to an undergraduate programme relevant to their Post-lyceum Year Apprenticeship Class specialty.
Applying for enrolment for specific specialties only, are to those who are duly qualified having all the eligibility requirements set and outlined by Greek Legislature applied by the legally binding terms and directives of applicable laws. As the prerequisite health medical certificate of five consecutive years validity for the Ho.Re.Ca (hotel, restaurant, cafe, catering) programmes of study such Bakery and Patisserie, Cookery, Hotel Businesses' specialties; or eye medical tests which exclude cases of achromatopsia (type of colour blindness) and dyschromatopsia for specialties such Automotive Electrical Systems, Electrical Works, Electronic Appliances, Installations and Informatics Units; or allied healthcare programmes; or otherwise specialty required to have passed the relevant examinations.
The Vocational School (EPAS) (Επαγγελματική Σχολή; ΕΠΑ.Σ.; 1952–Present) of Public Employment Service (DYPA) is 2 years' duration. Also known as Vocational School of Apprenticeship (Επαγγελματική Σχολή Μαθητείας, Epaggelmatiki Sxoli Mathitias), shortened to EPAS Apprenticeship. Since 2021, EPAS Apprenticeship is a lower secondary two-track education system, Dual VET (δυικό σύστημα επαγγελματικής εκπαίδευσης και κατάρτισης), having alternating periods in a school with theory classroom and at the workplace with work-(traineeship) practice experience (πρόγραμμα μάθησης σε εργασιακό χώρο), with terms are contractually regulated by law and labour agreement. Balance between school-and work-based training: in-company (ca. 70%) + school (ca. 30%). Student insurance and two-part agreement (σύμβαση μαθητείας) between the student and apprenticeship company are applied. Generally, the maximum number of students that can register in a given education programme is up to 20. Apprenticeship (Μαθητεία) is based on the German dual learning system which combines classroom education with paid practical work in a business. EPAS is operated by Public Employment Service (DYPA). The EPAS of DYPA provides its students in having an apprenticeship term work placement by finding and coordinating it. Students are entitled to receive at least the national minimum wage for their age. The majority of these students are classed as unskilled workers (entry-level). Admitted students are aged from 15 to 23-year-old maximum who must have completed the gymnasium school. The EPAS of DYPA awarded "Πτυχίο Επαγγελματικής Εκπαιδευσης και Κατάρτισης, Επιπέδου 3" (Ptychio of Vocational Education and Training, Level 3; i.e. Diploma of Vocational Education and Training at Level 3) after qualifying examinations of the National Accreditation Examinations (Εξετάσεις Πιστοποίησης) will be held at EOPPEP examination centers.
The Experimental Vocational School (PEPAS; Greek: Πειραματική Επαγγελματική Σχολή; Π.ΕΠΑ.Σ.; 2021–Present), is also known as Experimental Vocational School of Apprenticeship, founded in 2021 by Public Employment Service (DYPA) in collaboration with German-Hellenic Chamber of Industry and Commerce and Institute of the Greek Tourism Confederation (INSETE). Eligible to apply are those aged 18 years old and over, holders of at least a lower secondary school leaving certificate (gymnasium) and have a verified knowledge of a foreign language (English or French or German) at level B2 in both written and spoken by holding a valid formal certificate. As of 2021-2022 school year, there are provide the specialities Culinary Art Technician (cook), Food & Beverage Service, Customer Service in the Tourism Business.
Post-lyceum Year Apprenticeship Class (Μεταλυκειακό Έτος Τάξη Μαθητείας; 2016–Present) is provided by Vocational Lyceum (ΕPΑL). 
Only EPAL graduates and Lyceum graduates hold EPAL Diploma of Vocational Education and Training at HQF level 4 are admitted to Post-lyceum Year Apprenticeship Class being regarded as a separate and distinctive stage of post-secondary education (i.e. Μετα-δευτεροβάθμιου Κύκλου Σπουδών). It includes 1 year post-secondary apprenticeship dual programme (non-tertiary; Dual VET two-track education system) having alternating periods in an EPAL school unit with classroom instruction (theory 1 day/week, 7 hrs per day) and at the workplace with work practice training (4 days/week, 7 hrs per day). All apprenticeships schemes should include a contract (i.e. Σύμβαση Μαθητείας), wage and social security rights/benefits to student which is a trainee referred to simply as "apprentice". EPAL Apprenticeship Class programmes are based on Public Employment Service (DYPA) at its dual learning principle and follow the same quality framework for apprenticeships. Graduates of the apprenticeship class will receive "Βεβαίωση Πιστοποίησης Μεταλυκειακού Έτους Τάξης Μαθητείας" (Certificate of Post-Lyceum Year Apprenticeship Class).
If they wish the Apprenticeship Class graduates are therefore eligible to take the National Accreditation Examinations (i.e. Εξετάσεις Πιστοποίησης) will be held at EOPPEP examination centers. Once, they have been passed all examinations then are awarded "Πτυχίο Επαγγελματικής Ειδικότητας, Εκπαίδευσης και Κατάρτισης, Επιπέδου 5" (Ptychio of Vocational Education and Training, Level 5; i.e. Diploma of Vocational Education and Training at Level 5). With the law 4763/2020 the Post-lyceum Year Apprenticeship Class graduates having Diploma of Vocational Education and Training at Level 5, after successful specific entrance examinations (κατατακτήριες εξετάσεις), allows to them admission into the Higher Education (level 6) to an undergraduate programme relevant to their Post-lyceum Year Apprenticeship Class specialty.
Vocational Lyceum 3 years (EPAL; Επαγγελματικό Λύκειο; ΕΠΑ.Λ.; 2006–Present)
Laboratory of Special Vocational Education (Εργαστήριο Ειδικής Επαγγελματικής Εκπαίδευσης; Ε.Ε.Ε.ΕΚ.), 6 years special education at HQF Level 2
Public Schools of Tourism Education (ΔΣΤΕ; Δημόσιες Σχολές Τουριστικής Εκπαίδευσης) are operated by Ministry of Tourism. Types are the 1.) Schools of Tourist Guides, 2.) Further-training Programmes of Employees in Tourism Sector (non-formal education), 3.) Institutes of Vocational Training (IEKs). The IEKs comprise the specialties of: Culinary Art (cookery); Bakery and Pastry (baker and pâtissier); Tourism Units and Ηospitality Businesses (front office / reception, floor service / housekeeping, commodity education); Specialist of Business Administration and Economics in the Tourism Field.
Α School of Meat Professions (SEK; Σχολή Επαγγελμάτων Κρέατος; Σ.Ε.Κ.; 1977–Present) is accredited by the Ministry of Rural Development and Food. There are public and private schools of meat professions. The 300 hours programme has 85 hours theory classes at school and 100 hours laboratory classes (ca. 61.6%), 15 hours educational visits (ca. 5%), 100 hours in-company work-based training (internship, ca. 33.3%). The term is 5 hours per day, 5 days per week, for 12 consecutive weeks. The specialties of the School of Meat Professions are, Meat Processing Technician (meat cutter, butcher, Greek: κρεοπώλης), Animal Slaughter (Greek: εκδοροσφαγέας).
Vocational Training Schools (ESK; Greek: Επαγγελματικές Σχολές Κατάρτισης; Ε.Σ.Κ.;  2020–Present) is 2-year post-gymnasium vocational education and training school at HQF level 3. Admitted students must have completed the gymnasium school. It can be public, private, day or evening school. It awarded "Πτυχίο Επαγγελματικής Εκπαιδευσης και Κατάρτισης, Επιπέδου 3" (Ptychio of Vocational Education and Training, Level 3; i.e. Diploma of Vocational Education and Training at HQF level 3) after qualifying examinations of the National Accreditation Examinations will be held at EOPPEP examination centers.
Laboratory Centre (Εργαστηριακό Κέντρο; Ε.Κ.; 2013–Present), 3 years secondary education. Admitted students must have completed at least the lower secondary education school (gymnasium or its equivalent). Awarded "Βεβαίωση Επαγγελματικής Εκπαίδευσης" (literally "Certificate of Vocational Training"). Awarded "Πτυχίο Επαγγελματικής Ειδικότητας και Κατάρτισης, Επιπέδου 3" (Ptychio of Vocational Education and Training, Level 3; i.e. Diploma of Vocational Education and Training at HQF level 3) after qualifying examinations of the National Accreditation Examinations will be held at EOPPEP examination centers.
Institute of Vocational Training (I.E.K.; Ινστιτούτο Επαγγελματικής Κατάρτισης 1992–Present), is 2 years adult post-secondary vocational education and training and 960 hours at a work placement (experiential learning, practicum). Admitted students must have completed at least the upper secondary education (lyceum). EOPPEP organisation is the statutory body for the IEKs. The IEK awarded "Δίπλωμα Επαγγελματικής Εκπαιδευσης και Κατάρτισης, Επιπέδου 5" (Diploma of Vocational Education and Training, Level 5) after qualifying examinations of the National Accreditation Examinations (Εξετάσεις Πιστοποίησης) will be held at EOPPEP examination centers. See a list of IEK study programmes which is set out below, click on the "[show]":
Higher education, also called tertiary, third stage, provided by Higher Educational Institutes (HEIs; Greek: Ανώτατα Εκπαιδευτικά Ιδρύματα; Α.E.I.) and consist of Universities and specialist Academies, which primarily cater to the military. They are mostly autonomous, but the government is responsible for their funding and the distribution of students to undergraduate programs. Higher Education Institutions in Greece are public universities and can be attended without charge of a tuition fee, textbooks, and for the majority of students meals are also provided for free. About 25% of postgraduate programs have free tuition, while about 30% of students are eligible to attend programs tuition-free based on individual criteria. Each academic year is 32 weeks study programme, divided into two semesters of 16 weeks each.
Among the Greek universities offer English-taught full-time programmes with tuition are: National and Kapodistrian University of Athens (NKUA) 4-year undergraduate programme in Archaeology, History, and Literature of Ancient Greece, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki (AUTh) School of Medicine 6-year undergraduate programme for foreign citizens, University of Piraeus, School of Economics, Business and International Studies, Department of International and European Studies, postgraduate programme titled Μaster of Science (MSc) American Studies: Politics, Strategy and Economics, also the University Center of International Programmes of Studies (UCIPS) of the public International Hellenic University (IHU) offers English-taught postgraduate programmes.
According to the article 16 of the Greek constitution, private tertiary education is not allowed in Greece, and the government only recognizes the degree programmes offered by the public universities. In Greece, private colleges are Post-secondary Education Centres (Greek: Κέντρα Μεταλυκειακής Εκπαίδευσης; ΚΕ.Μ.Ε.) at non-formal education level operate under the proper registration accredited by the Ministry of Education.
Usually, most private colleges have been authorised to offer foreign undergraduate and postgraduate programmes following franchise or validation agreements with collaborating universities established in other countries, primarily in the UK, leading to degrees awarded directly by those foreign universities.
The formal education system includes the primary, secondary and higher education. The formal private education schools in Greece are δημοτικό (dimotiko; primary), γυμνάσιο (gymnasio; gymnasium), λύκειο (lykeio; lyceum), ινστιτούτο επαγγελματικής κατάρτισης (Institute of Vocational Training - IEK). The bodies of "non-typical education" term (φορείς μη τυπικής εκπαίδευσης) are outside the formal education system, referred to as non-formal education, the well-known include:
The Citizens' Digital Academy (Greek: Ψηφιακή Ακαδημία Πολιτών) from Ministry of Digital Governance, which has been set in English as National Digital Academy, has launched in May 2020, provides freely online training seminars (webinars) to the public for registered online participants, in the categories of Communication and Cooperation, Internet, Tools for Daily Use, Digital Entrepreneurship, Computer Science, Cutting-edge Technologies. The website includes also the Digital Competence Self-Assessment Tool on the current digital competence level based on the three fundamental elements (knowledge, skills and attitudes) to get a reliable self-testing if and where it needs improving, based on the 2020 Digital Skills Index (DSI) and on the European DigComp Framework, version 2.1.
The Institute of the Greek Tourism Confederation (INSETE) provides freely online webinar series and freely online educational seminars to the public for registered online participants where there are specialty sectors and each sector comprises  a number of seminars. A Certificate of Attendance in a sector will be given to those registered participants who attended 70% of the total hours of a sector. Sectors include: Hospitality Operations, Hospitality Sales & Marketing, Food & Beverage, Culinary Arts, Personal Development, Leadership and Management, Human Recourses Management.
Centre of Continuing Education and Lifelong Learning (KEDIVIM; Greek: Κέντρο Επιμόρφωσης και Δια Βίου Μάθησης; Κ.Ε.Δι.Βι.Μ.).
Post-secondary Education Centre (Greek: Κέντρo Μεταλυκειακής Εκπαίδευσης; ΚΕ.Μ.Ε.) to which the Private Colleges belong.The National Qualification Framework (NQF) of Greece is officially named Hellenic Qualification Framework (HQF; Greek: Ελληνικό Πλαίσιο Προσόντων) has an 8-level framework that unites non-formal and formal qualifications aligned to the appropriate levels from the National Organisation for the Certification of Qualifications and Vocational Guidance (EOPPEP; Greek: Εθνικός Οργανισμός Πιστοποίησης Προσόντων και Επαγγελματικού Προσανατολισμού; Ε.Ο.Π.Π.Ε.Π.) and for qualifications granted by Higher Education Institutes (HEIs) in according to the Hellenic (National) Authority for Higher Education (HAHE; Greek: Εθνική Αρχή Ανώτατης Εκπαίδευσης; ΕΘ.Α.Α.Ε.). The HQF is linked to the European Qualifications Framework (EQF) and to the Qualifications Framework in the European Higher Education Area (QF-EHEA). The HQF is the Greek Register of Regulated Qualifications (Μητρώο Ρυθμιζόμενων Τίτλων) provides information for the accredited awarding bodies and the regulated qualifications of study (officially recognized) in Greece. The learning-outcomes-based qualification frameworks level systems of HQF, EQF, ISCED have reference levels classify the learning outcomes into reflection of study load (the number of credit points), knowledge, skills, grant equal professional rights of level, attainment covering formal and non-formal education recognized programmes which are designed within a national context and to make grades more comparable in an international context. See a list of HQF levels which is set out below, click on the "[show]": 
Education schools are defunct after either closure or replacement, for example:
Secondary Vocational Schools of Ministry of Education (Υ.ΠΑΙ.Θ.):
Επαγγελματική Σχολή (ΕΠΑΣ; Vocational School; 2 years; Law 3475/2006; 2006–2013)25 hours/week. Only subjects of specialisation. Admitted students must have completed at least the first grade of the upper secondary education school (lyceum). Awarded Specialisation Diploma.
Σχολικό Εργαστηριακό Κέντρο (ΣΕΚ; Schooled Vocational Training Centre; SEK; 3 years, 1986–2013)
Τεχνική Επαγγελματική Σχολή (ΤΕΣ; Technical Vocational School; 2 years; Law 576/1977; 1977–1998)70% subjects of specialisation and 30% subjects of general education. Admitted students must have completed at least the final year of the lower secondary education school (gymnasium graduates or its equivalent). Awarded Specialisation Diploma.Higher Education Institutes of Ministry of Education:
Τεχνολογικό Εκπαιδευτικό Ίδρυμα (ΤΕΙ; Technological Educational Institute; 3+1⁄2 years 1983–1995, 4 years 1995–2019, 1983–2019)Varied Schools:
Σχολές Τουριστικής  Εκπαίδευσης (ΣΤΕ; Schools of Tourism Education; Law 2387/2000; 2000–2003)
Σχολές Τουριστικών Επαγγελμάτων (ΣΤΕ; Schools of Tourism Professions; Law 567/1937; 1937–2000)
Λύκειο Εμπορικού Ναυτικού (ΛΕΝ; Merchant Navy Lyceum; 3 years; by Ministry of Mercantile Marine; –1998)
Κέντρα Επαγγελματικής Κατάρτισης (ΚΕΚ; Vocational Training Centres; replaced by KEDIVIM of type 2, 1990–2012)
Κέντρα Ανωτέρας Τεχνικής Εκπαίδευσης (ΚΑΤΕ; Centers for Higher Technical Education; Law 652/1970; 1970–1977)
Δημόσιες Τεχνικές Σχολές Υπομηχανικών (ΔΤΣΥ; Public Technical Schools of Assistant Engineers; 4 years, 1959–1966)
Ινστιτούτο Επαγγελματικής Κατάρτισης, του ΟΤΕΚ (ΙΕΚ; Institute of Vocational Training; by ΟΤΕΚ; Law 3105/2003; 2003–2013)
Κέντρα Επαγγελματικής και Τεχνικής Εκπαίδευσης (ΚΕΤΕ; Centres of Vocational and Technical Education; 2 years secondary education)
Εργαστήρια Ελευθέρων Σπουδών (ΕΕΣ; Centres of Liberal Studies; Legislative Decree 9/9-10-1935; replaced by KEDIVIM of type 1; 1935–2012)
Κέντρα Ανωτέρας Τεχνικής και Επαγγελματικής Εκπαίδευσης (ΚΑΤΕΕ; Centers for Higher Technical-Vocational Education; Law 576/1977; 1977–1983)
Επαγγελματική Σχολή, του ΟΤΕΚ (ΕΠΑΣ; Vocational School; by Organization of Tourism Education and Training [ΟΤΕΚ]; Law 3105/2003; 2003–2013)
Κέντρο Επιμόρφωσης και Δια Βίου Μάθησης; Κ.Ε.Δι.Βι.Μ. τύπου 1 και τύπου 2 (KEDIVIM of type 1, KEDIVIM of type 2; replaced by KEDIVIM; 2012–2020)Lyceums of Ministry of Education:
Αθλητικό Λύκειο (Athletic Lyceum; 3 years)
Ενιαίο Λύκειο (Integrated Lyceum; 3 years, 1997–2006)
Κλασικό Λύκειο (Classic Lyceum; 3 years; Law 1566/1985; 1985 –1997)
Τεχνικό Λύκειο (Technical Lyceum; 3 years; Law 576/1977; 1977–1985)
Επαγγελματικό Λύκειο (Vocational Lyceum; 3 years; Law 576/1977; 1977–1985)
Λύκειο Ναυτικής Κατεύθυνσης (Nautical Lyceum; 3 years; Law 309/1976; 1976–1985)
Ενιαίο Πολυκλαδικό Λύκειο (ΕΠΛ; Integrated Multifarious Lyceum; 3 years; Law 1566/1985; 1985–1997)Εξατάξιο Γυμνάσιο (Six-Grade Gymnasium; integrated 3 years lower and 3 years upper secondary school)
Τεχνικό Επαγγελματικό Εκπαιδευτήριο (ΤΕΕ; Technical Vocational Training Centre; 3 years; Law 2640/1998; 1998–2006)
Τεχνικό Επαγγελματικό Λύκειο (ΤΕΛ; Technical Vocational Lyceum; 3 years; Law 1566/1985, Government Gazette 167/A/30-9-1985, 1985–1998) awarded upper secondary leaving certificate titled "Πτυχίο Τεχνικού Επαγγελματικού Λυκείου", Technical Vocational Lyceum Ptychio (Level 4), i.e. Technical Vocational Lyceum Diploma was one (double) qualification has both an Apolytirio and a Specialisation Diploma, 34 hours/week,i.e. High School Diploma comprising core curriculum and tech-vocational curriculum subjects awarded one parchment with both curricula listed.Corruption in Greece in public sector has the first place of all EU countries, and is the most corrupt country in the European Union, a survey revealed in 2012. The Greek public schools lack a human resource development, having huge corruption at all education levels according to the Global Corruption Barometer. According to the 2020 Corruption Perceptions Index reported by Transparency International, Greece is the 59th least corrupt country out of the 180 countries worldwide, scored 50% corruption out of 100%, of the perceived level of public level corruption on a scale of 0 (highly corrupt) to 100 (clear).
Accounts of reports of the Greece National Transparency Authority (EAD; formerly Inspectors-Controllers Body for Public Administration; SEEDD) show criminal offences, complaints, lawsuits and criminal prosecutions are against public school educators and directors were found to commit violations; using profane, obscene, or ethnically offensive language; organized crime activities; copyright infringement; fraud; personal data theft; use of handphone and other unauthorised electronic and mobile devices during curriculum time; sexual abuse assault from students and educators; corruption; forgery; extortion; illegal fees; embezzlement of school funds; bullying.
The public Institute of Vocational Training (IEK) educator employment fixed-term contracts are restricted to specifically candidates only, while all the rest applicant educators remain in vein. One official of Ministry of Education, public IEK director and deputy director are entitled each semester to decide who will be hire for IEK contracting educators, while the subject to fulfilling the educator entry criteria omits, as well many of them receive their contracting appointment using, as a rule, unfair means.
The public school educators and majorly the public ΙΕΚs educators are not selected for their competence, ethic, value, and teaching performance. Rather, they are identified by virtue of their educational attainment. This very fact has discouraged proactive improvement of education and subsequently has reduced the quality in general.
About 95% of public IEKs lack laboratories, premises, libraries, prescribed textbooks which they will have to be purchased at student its own cost. The main findings include IEK students' delayed arrival in class and whole days and hours chronic absenteeism over the years permitted freely from many educators who do not keep record of the student absence. The public IEK graduates have very lower limited employment rate with highly per cent rejection within labour market due to their lower performance.
Individual employers often offer an exploitative internship or apprenticeship to a student with  a consequence of labour law violations.
Many IEK educators during class hours distributed on the school premises their personal printed cards to advertise their profit purpose services or goods which are on offer.
The Greek public schooling is undergoing a crisis with the Greek Ministry of Education (Υ.ΠΑΙ.Θ.) consistently hiding itself and refusing to answer officially once a formal report and complaint has been submitted by students of a public school, by using registered postal mail and/or via online with vetted student's authorized email account (has the same legal value with a registered postal mail) or student school authorizing user name and password serves as its electronic authorization, according harassment, disruptive behavior, threats, misconduct, criminal offenses, abuse, assault, fraud, malpractice, maladministration, discrimination, intimidation, that happen during the school's hours and breaks at school's premises performed either by other students or public IEK educators or public school educators and administrators. This practice is mainly followed by the General Secretariat for Vocational Education,  Training, Life-Long Learning and Youth (GGEEKDBM&N); Greek: Γενική Γραμματεία Επαγγελματικής Εκπαίδευσης, Κατάρτισης, Δια Βίου Μάθησης και Νεολαίας; of Greece Ministry of Education (Υ.ΠΑΙ.Θ.) and its Department of Educational Personnel Administration of Life-Long Learning and Youth (Τμήμα Διοίκησης Εκπαιδευτικού Προσωπικού Δια Βίου Μάθησης και Νεολαίας). There is no defence for this distinctly illegal act of the Ministry of Education.
Greece was controversial for its legal disciplinary measure of school corporal punishment because was widely used and allowed in public schools, performed by school educators under the Principal's express authority, until it was banned in 1998 at primary schools and in 2005 at secondary schools. The physical punishment took place in front of all students consisted in the form of caning the buttocks of a student with a paddle or strap, caning on the palm of the hand with a wood stick, hitting a student's face, expulsion set in the school outdoor courtyard in the cold winter.
The former government agency of ΟΕΕΚ (Οργανισμός Επαγγελματικής Εκπαίδευσης και Κατάρτισης; English: Organisation for Vocational Education and Training; which replaced by Εθνικός Οργανισμός Πιστοποίησης Προσόντων και Επαγγελματικού Προσανατολισμού; ΕΟΠΠΕΠ; English: National Organisation for the Certification of Qualifications and Vocational Guidance; EOPPEP) had embezzled €6,000,000 of European Commission funds. Since 30 July 2010, an official investigation on the criminal conspiracy theft began from the EU Council of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and European Convention on Human Rights.
One out of the three public school students in Greece have received physical violation and abuse include verbal at 56.5 percent, followed by physical abuse at a rate of 30.5 percent and the threat of social exclusion at 27.8 percent. Greece ranks 4th place of student bullying amongst Europe countries according to the 1st European Anti-Bullying Network Conference, "Bullying and Cyberbullying Across Europe", Conference Proceedings, Athens, 2015 EAN (Ευρωπαϊκό Δίκτυο κατά του Σχολικού Εκφοβισμού).
Offences and corruption committed by highly rank or wealth persons holding public education school positions are rarely properly and transparently prosecuted.
The tuition fee requirement from the most Greek Higher Education Institutes (HEIs) postgraduate programmes is contrary and entirely violating the Constitution of Greece, that all Greek citizens (and certain foreigners who live and work in the country) are entitled to free education on all levels at state educational institutions. The same violation act was done from the founding (law 2009/1992) of the Institutes of Vocational Training (IEKs) where all public IEK students were required to pay up to €367 statute fee for every semester up until the 2012–2013 academic year, that has been repealed since 2013–2014 academic year (article 22, law 4186/2013).Latin honors
Educational stage
Academic grading in Greece
Education in ancient Greece
Open access to scholarly communication in Greece
Κέντρο Εκπαιδευτικής Έρευνας, Το Ελληνικό Εκπαιδευτικό Σύστημα Συνοπτική εικόνα σε αριθμούς, Αθήνα, 2003. (ISBN 960-541-108-3) Greek Education System
Education Research Centre - Ministry of Education and Religious Affairs, The Greek Education System. Facts and Figures (Supervision: Prof. V. Koulaidis. Compiled by C. Papakyriakopoulos, A. Patouna, A. Katsis & S. Georgiadou), Athens, 2003. (ISBN 960-541-106-7)Information on education in Greece, OECD - Contains indicators and information about Greece and how it compares to other OECD and non-OECD countries
Diagram of Greek education system, OECD Diagram of Greek education system, OECD (in Greek) Using 2011 version of ISCED classification
Education in Greece, webdossier by Education Worldwide, a portal of the German Education Server