Numerology is the pseudoscientific belief in a divine or mystical relationship between a number and one or more coinciding events. It is also the study of the numerical value of the letters in words, names, and ideas. It is often associated with the paranormal, alongside astrology and similar to divinatory arts.
Despite the long history of numerological ideas, the word "numerology" is not recorded in English before c. 1907.
The term numerologist can be used for those who place faith in numerical patterns and draw pseudoscientific inferences from them, even if those people do not practice traditional numerology. For example, in his 1997 book Numerology: Or What Pythagoras Wrought, mathematician Underwood Dudley uses the term to discuss practitioners of the Elliott wave principle of stock market analysis.
The practice of gematria, assigning numerical values to words and names and imputing those values with religious meaning, dates back to antiquity. An Assyrian inscription from the 8th century BC, commissioned by Sargon II. declares "the king built the wall of Khorsabad 16,283 cubits long to correspond with the numerical value of his name." Rabbinic literature used gematria to interpret passages in the Hebrew Bible.
In 325 AD, following the First Council of Nicaea, departures from the beliefs of the state church were classified as civil violations within the Roman Empire. Numerology, referred to as isopsephy, remained in use in conservative Greek Orthodox circles. Despite the church's resistance to numerology, there have been arguments made for the presence of numerology in the Bible and religious architecture.
Some alchemical theories were closely related to numerology. For example, Persian-Arab alchemist Jabir ibn Hayyan framed his experiments in an elaborate numerology based on the names of substances in the Arabic language.
In addition, the 6th century philosopher and mystic Pythagoras believed that numbers carried sacred codes and we divinely inspired and created.
Numerology is prominent in Sir Thomas Browne's 1658 literary Discourse The Garden of Cyrus. Throughout its pages, the author attempts to demonstrate that the number five and the related Quincunx pattern can be found throughout the arts, in design, and in nature – particularly botany.
Furthermore, the philosopher and psychologist Carl Jung said, "A mathematician once remarked that everything in science was man-made except numbers, which had been created by God himself."
There are various numerology systems which assign numerical value to the letters of an alphabet. Examples include the Abjad numerals in Arabic, Hebrew numerals, Armenian numerals, and Greek numerals. The practice within Jewish tradition of assigning mystical meaning to words based on their numerical values, and on connections between words of equal value, is known as gematria.
There are various systems of numerology that use the Latin alphabet. Different methods of interpretation exist, including Chaldean, Pythagorean, Hebraic, Helyn Hitchcock's method, Phonetic, Japanese, Arabic and Indian.
English Qaballa (EQ) refers to a system of Hermetic Qabalah that interprets the letters of the English alphabet via an assigned set of values developed by James Lees in 1976. Like most of the systems developed since the death of Aleister Crowley (1875-1947), it was created with the intent of gaining a better understanding of the mysteries elaborated in his inspired works, especially those in Liber AL vel Legis, the Book of the Law. According to Jake Stratton-Kent, "the English Qaballa is a qabalah and not a system of numerology. A qabalah is specifically related to three factors: one, a language; two, a 'holy' text or texts; three, mathematical laws at work in these two."
The Arabic system of numerology is known as Abjad notation or Abjad numerals. In this system each letter of Arabic alphabet has a numerical value. This system is the foundation of ilm-ul-cipher, the Science of Cipher, and ilm-ul-huroof, the Science of Alphabet:
ط=9
ح=8
ز=7
و=6
ه=5
د=4
ج=3
ب=2
أ=1
ص=90
ف=80
ع=70
س=60
ن=50
م=40
ل=30
ك=20
ي=10
ظ=900
ض=800
ذ=700
خ=600
ث=500
ت=400
ش=300
ر=200
ق=100
غ=1000
Some Chinese assign a different set of meanings to the numbers and certain number combinations are considered luckier than others. In general, even numbers are considered lucky, since it is believed that good luck comes in pairs.
Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), and its associated fields such as acupuncture, base their system on mystical numerical associations, such as the "12 vessels circulating blood and air corresponding to the 12 rivers flowing toward the Central Kingdom; and 365 parts of the body, one for each day of the year" being the basis of locating acupuncture points.
Cantonese frequently associate numbers with the following connotations (based on its sound), which may differ in other varieties of Chinese:
一 [jɐ́t]  – sure
二 [ji̭ː]  – easy 易 [ji̭ː]
三 [sáːm]  – live 生 [sáːŋ] but it can also be seen as a halved eight when using Arabic numerals (3) (8) and so considered unlucky.
四 [sēi]  – considered unlucky since 4 is a homophone with the word for death or suffering 死 [sěi] (see tetraphobia), yet only in the Shanghainese, it is a homophone of water (水) and is considered lucky because water is associated with money.
五 [ŋ̬]  – the self, me, myself 吾 [ŋ̭], nothing, never 唔 [ŋ, m] in the Shanghainese, it is a homophone of fish (鱼)
六 [lùːk]  – easy and smooth, all the way
七 [tsʰɐ́t]  – a slang/vulgar word in Cantonese.
八 [pāːt]  – sudden fortune, prosperity 發 [fāːt]
九 [kɐ̌u]  – long in time 久 [kɐ̌u], enough 夠 [kɐ̄u] or a slang/vulgar word derived from dog 狗 [kɐ̌u] in CantoneseSome "lucky number" combinations include:
99 – doubly long in time, hence eternal; used in the name of a popular Chinese American supermarket chain, 99 Ranch Market.
168 – many premium-pay telephone numbers in China begin with this number, which is considered lucky. It is also the name of a motel chain in China (Motel 168).
888 – Three times the prosperity, means "wealthy wealthy wealthy".
6 = U, V, 9
369 - 369=loveThere is no assignment for the number 9. Numerologists analyze double-digit numbers from 10 to 99.
In southern India, mostly Tamil Nadu, the numbers assigned to English alphabets are the same as in the Chaldean system. The list is shown below:
1 = A, I, J, Q, Y
2 = B, K, R
3 = C, G, L, S
4 = D, M, T
5 = E, H, N, X
6 = U, V, W
7 = O, Z
8 = F, PThere is no assignment for the number 9. Numerologists analyze double-digit numbers from 10 to 99. [14] Ex: Number 29 is supposed to be the worst numbered-name a person can have.
Scientific theories are sometimes labeled "numerology" if their primary inspiration appears to be a set of patterns rather than scientific observations. This colloquial use of the term is quite common within the scientific community and it is mostly used to dismiss a theory as questionable science.
The best known example of "numerology" in science involves the coincidental resemblance of certain large numbers that intrigued such eminent men as mathematical physicist Paul Dirac, mathematician Hermann Weyl and astronomer Arthur Stanley Eddington. These numerical coincidences refer to such quantities as the ratio of the age of the universe to the atomic unit of time, the number of electrons in the universe, and the difference in strengths between gravity and the electric force for the electron and proton. ("Is the Universe Fine Tuned for Us?", Stenger, V.J., page 3).
The discovery of atomic triads, an early attempt to sort the elements into some logical order by their physical properties, was once considered a form of numerology, and yet ultimately led to the construction of the periodic table. Here the atomic weight of the lightest element and the heaviest are summed, and averaged, and the average is found to be very close to that of the intermediate weight element. This did not work with every triplet in the same group, but worked often enough to allow later workers to create generalizations.
Large number co-incidences continue to fascinate many mathematical physicists.
Wolfgang Pauli was also fascinated by the appearance of certain numbers, including 137, in physics.
British mathematician I. J. Good wrote:
Book of the Masters of the Secret House
Bullinger, E. W. (1921). Number in Scripture. Eyre & Spottiswoode (Bible Warehouse) Ltd. Archived from the original on 14 October 2011. Retrieved 26 February 2008.
Dudley, U. (1997). Numerology: Or, What Pythagoras Wrought. Mathematical Association of America. – a skeptical survey of the field through history
Schimmel, Annemarie (1993). The Mystery of Numbers (a scholarly compendium of the connotations and associations of numbers in historical cultures). New York: Oxford University Press. p. 314. ISBN 0-87-516422-6.
Stratton-Kent, Jake (March 1988). "The English Qaballa". The Equinox: British Journal of Thelema. VII (1): 17–25. ISSN 0953-7015.
Stratton-Kent, Jake (May 1988b). "What is a Qabalah?". The Equinox: British Journal of Thelema. VII (2): 59–61. ISSN 0953-7015. Media related to Numerology at Wikimedia Commons
Number symbolism on the Encyclopædia Britannica