Newsy is an American news network headquartered in Atlanta, Georgia, and owned by the E. W. Scripps Company. Its content is available for free on OTT platforms including Pluto TV (which inserts short-form Newsy Briefs into commercial breaks on their linear channels), via smart tv app, The Roku Channel, Xumo, Haystack News and Samsung TV Plus, in addition to streaming devices such as Roku, Apple TV and Amazon Fire TV, and is also available for free on over-the-air stations, as of October 2021. Internationally, Newsy is carried in Canada by VMedia owned RiverTV on channel 26.
Newsy was founded in 2008. In its early years, Newsy operated primarily as a syndication business, selling news and original content to major digital journalism brands that included AOL/Huffington Post, Microsoft and Mashable.
In January 2014, Newsy was acquired for $35 million by the E. W. Scripps Company.
In September 2017, Scripps announced it would take over RLTV's (Retirement Living Television) cable and satellite carriage agreements for approximately 26 million subscribers and reprogram the network with Newsy's lineup of shows.
Newsy has six U.S. offices: Columbia, Missouri; Chicago; Cincinnati; New York; Denver; and Washington, D.C.
On April 6, 2021, Scripps announced that it would expand Newsy into a free over-the-air network, as well as being available on streaming platforms, starting October 1. The network would be available over-the-air on Scripps-owned Ion Television stations, along with some traditional Scripps stations without an Ion sister station and the former Ion-owned stations transferred to Inyo Broadcast Holdings, along with offering the network to other station groups. It also announced plans to relocate Newsy's national headquarters to Atlanta. The Newsy over-the-air network launched on October 1, 2021, debuting a new logo and graphical identity (created by Elevation) that day as well; the current identity and goal of Newsy is designed to provide "balanced", impartial reporting (as opposed to the politicized content common on cable news channels).
In advance of the move exclusively to over-the-air distribution, Scripps began to notify traditional cable and satellite providers, along with Internet television providers, at the end of March that it would end distribution of the network via those means on June 30, 2021, ending the nearly 15-year life of the channel space, including its time as RLTV.
All starting times for Newsy's programs are in the Eastern Time Zone. For viewers residing in the Pacific Time Zone, it is three hours earlier.
As of November 2021, Newsy has current and pending affiliation agreements with 132 television stations in over 100 television markets encompassing 46 states, covering 83.89% of the United States.
Newsy's editorial content, as well as its TV apps, have won the following awards:
Apple TV's Best of 2015 list
National Edward R. Murrow award for its news documentary, "The War and Money Project" (2015)
Society of Environmental Journalists Awards for Reporting on the Environment (2018)
Online Journalism Award for its investigation, "Case Cleared" (2019)
Investigative journalism award from the Society of Professional Journalists for "Case Cleared" (2019)
National Edward R. Murrow award for its news documentary, "Walkout" (2019)
Robert F. Kennedy Journalism Award for "A Broken Trust" (2020)
Scripps Howard Award for innovation for its newsroom collaboration, "Newsy+Bellingcat" (2020)Newsy's editorial content has also been nominated for numerous awards including:
The News & Documentary Emmy Awards
The Digiday Publishing Awards
The Webby AwardsOfficial website
The War and Money Project, a Newsy's documentary