Iseyin is a city located in the Nigerian state of Oyo. It is approximately 100 km (62 mi) north of Ibadan. The city was estimated to have a population of 236,000, per a United Nations 2005 estimate, which increased to 302,990 in 2011, and has a total land mass of 1,419 km (548 sq mi). Iseyin is centrally located and accessible via road networks from Ibadan, Oyo, Abeokuta, and Ogbomoso. There are expanses of land which can be used for industrial, agricultural and institutional purposes in and around the city. The title of the monarch of Iseyin is "The Aseyin of Iseyin". There are a lot of educational institutions in Iseyin out of which are Polytechnic like SAF Polytechnic, Secondary Institutions like Kelani College Iseyin, Greater Love Model etc. which has since recorded a large amount of distinction in the WASSCE & SSCE results.
The city has a private Polytechnic named SAF Polytechnic, Iseyin, a Government Technical College and the Oyo state NYSC (National Youth Service Corps) permanent orientation camp, Also has so many secondary schools like Kelani College Iseyin, Saint Thomas, Greater Love Model. Kelani College Iseyin happened to be ranked the best secondary school in the whole of Iseyin and Oke Ogun due to the consistent academic success of their students in various external examinations like WASSCE & NECO and in various National competitions. Iseyin also has an ultra modern private Digital Library named Raji Oke-Esa Memorial Library, the library was commissioned by the Nigeria former president, General (Rtd.) Olusegun Obasanjo, and Ebedi Writers’ Residency situated at the hill-side of Barracks area of the city . This International Residency has brought great writers, journalists and authors all over the world including Africa's first Nobel Laurel, Prof. Wole Soyinka, Jumoke Verissiomo, Funmi Aluko, Richard Ali, Paul Liam and others.
The primary industry of the area is cotton-based textiles. Iseyin is the fourth largest city in Oyo state, after Ibadan, Ogbomoso and Oyo. Iseyin is also known as the home of Aso Òkè. Aso Òkè or Òfì is a popular traditional fabric mostly used for ceremonies amongst the Yoruba people of Nigeria.
Friesland Campina (Wamco) has a milk processing center in the city.
Tobacco is grown in Iseyin, amongst other food and cash crops, it is as a result of this that a big tobacco company - British American Tobacco - has a "leave office" in the city. Iseyin is part of the Oke-Ogun towns referred to as the “food basket’’ of Nigeria.
Because of sustainable annual rainfall in the area, the major agricultural activities are farming, hunting, fishing, and food processing, among others. Iseyin produces virtually all farm produces such as yam, maize, cassava, plantain among many others
Ikere Gorge dam is located in the city, it was said to be the second largest dam when it was discovered alongside Kanji dam, during President Obasanjo's regime (Military). Ikere gorge dam is a man made dam, It is a source of water for communities in Iseyin LGA. During rainy season, the dam do swells to full capacity.
The primary industry of Iseyin is cotton-based textiles, and Iseyin reputed as the home of Aso Ofi or Aso Oke, a popular traditional fabric worn on special occasions by the Yoruba usually for coronation, chieftaincy, wedding engagement, festivals, naming ceremony and other important events.
The maiden Aso-Ofi festival was observed on September 27, 2016, during the World Tourism Day. The festival was conceptualized to showcase and celebrate a locally made fabric in Oyo State.
Some popular people that originate from Iseyin include:
Professor Peller
Ahmed Raji
Olukayode Ariwoola
Shina Peller
Aseyin Palace
Iseyin City Hall
Koso
Barracks
Ijemba
Atoori
Coordinates: 7°58′N 3°36′E﻿ / ﻿7.967°N 3.600°E﻿ / 7.967; 3.600
