Tripuri cuisine is the type of food served in Tripura (situated in northeast India). The Tripuris are essentially nonvegetarians and hence the main courses are mainly prepared using meat, but with the addition of vegetables. Traditional Tripuri cuisine is known as Mui Borok. Tripuri food has a key ingredient called Berma which is a small, oil-pasted and dry fermented fish. The foods are considered to be healthy as they are usually prepared mostly without oil. 
Tripuri food such as bangui rice and fish stews, Muya (Bamboo shoot), local fishes, vegetables, herbs, Batema (this jelly-like food is prepared by making a paste of  Batema plant's corm or tuber (Elephant foot yam) with sodium powder and water to remove its raphide. After making the paste into bun-shaped, they are boiled with water containing sodium powder. Since lack of sodium powder cause throat to itch, they are cut into pieces and preferred with fresh pasted garlic, and Mosdeng), wahan moso (prepared by adding boiled pork, onion pieces, salt, pasted ginger and roasted green chilli paste) and roasted meat are extremely popular within and outside the state of Tripura.
The Tripuris are in general non-vegetarian, although some are vegetarians.
The major food items among Tripuris are:
Chakhwi
Mwkhwi
MwitruRice is called Mai in Kokborok. The different varieties of rice used are
Maisa
Maimi
GuriyaThe Tripuri people call their traditional cuisine Mui Borok.
Chakhwi (contains pasted rice and sodium powder)
Chakhgwi bwtwi
Chatang
ChampraiAwandru, Bwtwi, Hontali, Gudok, Khalok, Uhmai, Pehng, Napehng, Ik, Yokhpra, Sokrang, Maipolok, Yohk, Mur, Sok, Hang, Ser, Irimbak, Mosdeng, Kelua, Mohsotok, Akhata, Aloni, Ruk, Neransi
Gudok is prepared by smashing different king of vegetables.
Thentrwi mwkhwi
Thaiplo mwkhwi
Belphui mwkhwi
Dorompai mwkhwi
Thaihchumu mwkhwi
Thaihtwi mwkhwi
Jambi mwkhwi
Thaihchuk mwkhwi
Thaihstem mwkhwi
Daskuiya mwkhwi
Yasrem mwkhwiThe major food items of Tripuris include Wahan (pork), Tohhan (chicken), Puhan (mutton), Aah (fish), Aahthuk (prawns or shrimps), Khangrai (crabs), Shindai (mussels), Shikamuk (common periwinkle or turritella communis), Totobuck (pila (gastropod))
Tripuri fruits are Komla (Orange), Tháichug (Mango), Yóngphák Mükhüi (Tayberry), Boroi (Jujube), Kusúmai (Longan), Lechu (Lychee), Théntrüi (Tamarind), Tháichumu (Melon), Dórómpai, Mómphol (Watermelon), Mogüdam (Corn).
Vegetables grown in Tripuri households are mainly Kháklu (green Wax gourd), Kháklu Borók (whitish Wax Gourd), Phúl Kopi (Cauliflower), Bándá Kopi (Cabbage), Mílog (Bottle gourd), jínga toroi(Pointed gourd), Chakúmúra (Pumpkin), Phántok (Brinjal), Dérso (Okra), Lúbíya or Sóbai (Bean), Mulai (Radish), Phoro (Zucchini), Púitha (Snake gourd), Jíngga (Sponge gourd), Órai, Kósoi (Lima bean), Múi-maising, Khámá, Maising, Síping, Múiching, among many others.
Seasonings and herbs grown are mainly Móso (Chilli), Dónia (Coriander), Kásing Mósla (Culantro), Háching (Ginger), Sütüí (Turmeric), Banta, Milokbanta, Khundrúpui, Üsündüi, Gúnthu, Khumjar, Khumdaga, Khumpui, Khumtüisa.
Food containing raphides are Bátima (Elephant foot yam), Múitul (Elephant ear), Mukkhi (Taro), Tháh or Tháh Dúk (Yam).
Traditionally drinks are called chwak in Tripuri.
Chwak bwtwi
ChwarakTripuri culture
Tripuri peopleChahmung Borok (The dishes of the Borok people), Narendra Debbarma, KOHM.Tripuri cuisines page