The 1930 United States House of Representatives elections was an election for the United States House of Representatives in 1930 which occurred in the middle of President Herbert Hoover's term.
During the election cycle, the nation was entering its second year of the Great Depression, and Hoover was perceived as doing little to solve the crisis, with his personal popularity being very low. His Republican Party was initially applauded for instituting protectionist economic policies, which were intended to limit imports to stimulate the domestic market: however, after the passage of the heavily damaging Smoot-Hawley Tariff, a policy that was bitterly opposed by the Democratic Party, public opinion turned sharply against Republican policies, and the party  bore the blame for the economic collapse.
While the Democrats gained 52 seats in the 1930 midterm elections, Republicans retained a narrow one-seat majority after the polls closed; however, during the 13 months between these elections and the start of the 72nd Congress, 14 members-elect died (including incumbent Speaker Nicholas Longworth), and the Democrats gained an additional three seats in the special elections called to fill these vacancies, thus gaining control of the House (they held a 219-212 advantage over the Republicans when the new Congress convened).
This was the first of four consecutive Depression-era House elections in which Democrats made enormous gains, achieving a cumulative gain of 174 seats. Over the ensuing 64 years (until the 1994 midterm elections), House Republicans would be in the minority for all but four years, winning majorities only in 1946 and in 1952.
Source: Election Statistics - Office of the Clerk


   House seats by party holding plurality in state     80+% Republican    80+% Democratic     60+ to 80% Republican    60+ to 80% Democratic     up to 60% Republican    up to 60% Democratic 


     6+ Republican gain    6+ Democratic gain     3-5 Republican gain    3-5 Democratic gain     1-2 Republican gain    1-2 Democratic gain     1-2 Progressive gain     no net change 
Elections are listed by date and district.
1930 United States elections
1930 United States Senate elections
71st United States Congress
72nd United States CongressStevens, Susan. "The Congressional Elections of 1930: Politics of Avoidance" in Milton Plesur, ed., American Historian: Essays to Honor Selig Adler (1980), pp 149–158.
Susan F. Stevens, "Congressional Elections of 1930: Politics of Avoidance" (Ph.D. dissertation, State University of New York at Buffalo, 1980), reports that the depression seems to have not played as much of a role as prohibition, farm policy and the Smoot Hawley Tariff issues.  This study focuses on the political environment of the immediate post-Crash period. Contrary to modern anticipation and historical precedent, the first elections after the Stock Market debacle proved remarkably inconclusive. Despite a host of handicaps, of which economic uncertainty was only one, the incumbent Republican party managed to retain control of Congress. The margin, however, was not durable enough to withstand the deepening financial crisis. By the time the 72nd Congress was convened thirteen months later, the Democrats had secured the House of Representatives through a series of by-elections. Contemporary analysis of the 1930-31 period reveals a curious sense of ambivalence which those election results sustain. Newspapers, journals, popular publications and manuscripts have provided the main source of evidence. These subjective accounts have been weighed against the voting tallies in order to determine the context of the most significant campaigns and their results.  Surprisingly, the issue of economic depression was a minor concern during the general elections. Prohibition, tariff and farm policy featured far more prominently during the fall of 1930. By 1931, however, the economic issue had become predominant and voters registered their dismay by electing Democrats. This study indicates that the mutual reluctance of either political party to deal with the depression issue, coupled with an initial disinclination by voters to upset a heretofore comfortable status quo, produced an electoral ambivalence unequalled in American congressional politics. Only the continued inability of the Republican administration to reverse economic disruption persuaded voters to embrace the unproven abilities of Democratic legislators.
"Election Statistics". Office of the Clerk, U.S. House of Representatives. Retrieved November 14, 2010.