Morris College (MC) is a private, Baptist historically black college in Sumter, South Carolina. It was founded and is operated by the Baptist Educational and Missionary Convention of South Carolina.
Morris College was founded in 1908 by James J. Durham, initially as a grade school, high school, and college. The college is named after the Reverend Frank Morris because of his outstanding leadership throughout the African American community of South Carolina. The college's first president was Dr. Edward M. Brawley (1908-1912). Morris College awarded its first bachelor's degree in 1915 under the administration of the college's second president Dr. John Jacob Starks. The college's third president was Ira David Pinson, who steered the college to expansion during the Great Depression.
The college's longest-serving president was Dr. Luns C. Richardson, who served from 1974 to July 2017. The current president is Dr. Leroy Staggers, who formerly served as the college's academic dean.
Morris College offers bachelor's degrees in 20 areas of study. The college is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools to award four different types of bachelor's degrees: Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Fine Arts, Bachelor of Science, and Bachelor of Science in Education.
To effectively accomplish the purpose and philosophy of Morris College, its academic programs are organized into five academic divisions which oversee their respective departments.
The Division of General Studies allows students to develop a solid academic foundation before entering their major fields.
Honors ProgramBusiness Administration
Organizational Management ProgramEarly Childhood Education
Elementary Education
Secondary EducationMass Communications
Pastoral Ministry
Christian Education
English
Liberal Studies
English/Secondary Education
Criminal Justice
History
Political Science
Sociology
Social Studies/Secondary EducationBiology
Biology/Secondary Education
Mathematics
Mathematics/Secondary EducationThe university currently has chapters for eight of the nine National Pan-Hellenic Council organizations.
Morris athletics teams are the Hornets. The college is a member of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), primarily competing as an NAIA Independent within the Continental Athletic Conference since the 2005–06 academic year. The Hornets previously competed in the defunct Eastern Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (EIAC) from 1983–84 to 2004–05.
Morris competes in six intercollegiate varsity sports: Men's sports include baseball, basketball and track & field; while women's sports include basketball, softball and volleyball.
List of historically black colleges of the United StatesOfficial website
Official athletics website
