The Dubrovnik-Neretva County (pronounced [dǔbroːʋniːk-něreːtʋa]; Croatian: Dubrovačko-neretvanska županija, pronounced [dǔbroʋat͡ʃko-nerěːtʋanskaː ʒupǎnija]) is the southernmost county of Croatia, located in south Dalmatia. The county seat is Dubrovnik and other large towns are Korčula, Metković, Opuzen and Ploče. The Municipality of Neum, which belongs to neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina, divides the county in two parts which are connected only by the Pelješac Bridge. The southern part of the county consists of Dubrovnik and the surrounding area, including the Pelješac peninsula, and the islands of Korčula, Lastovo, Mljet, Šipan, Lopud and Koločep. The northern part of the county includes the Neretva Delta, the Baćina lakes north of Ploče, and a swath of hinterland near the southernmost slopes of Biokovo and around the hill of Rujnica. The northern part of the Mljet island is a national park. The Lastovo archipelago is a designated nature park. The southernmost tip of the county is the Prevlaka peninsula at the border with Montenegro. It is the only Croatian county that borders Montenegro.
Although the 9 kilometres-long stretch of coast belonging to Neum effectively makes the southern part of the county an exclave (disconnecting it from mainland Croatia) it is still connected with the rest of the country via territorial waters. Road traffic going to and from Dubrovnik through Neum is usually less subject to customs controls in order to reduce the traffic congestion. The road connecting Dubrovnik to the rest of the country via Neum has one lane per direction and bus lines passing through Neum often make rest stops there so that passengers can take advantage of lower Bosnian taxes and purchase tobacco and alcoholic beverages as they tend to be cheaper there.
On the local level, the Dubrovnik-Neretva County is further subdivided into 5 cities (grad, pl. gradovi) and 17 municipalities (općina, pl. općine):
City of Dubrovnik (county seat)
Town of Korčula
Town of Metković
Town of Opuzen
Town of Ploče
Municipality of Blato
Municipality of Dubrovačko Primorje
Municipality of Janjina
Municipality of Konavle
Municipality of Kula Norinska
Municipality of Lastovo
Municipality of Lumbarda
Municipality of Mljet
Municipality of Orebić
Municipality of Pojezerje
Municipality of Slivno
Municipality of Smokvica
Municipality of Ston
Municipality of Trpanj
Municipality of Vela Luka
Municipality of Zažablje
Municipality of Župa DubrovačkaAs of the 2011 census, the county had 122,568 residents. The population density is 69 people per km.
At the 2011 census, ethnic Croats formed the vast majority with 94.4% of the population, followed by Serbs at 1.7% and 3.9% being other ethnic groups combined.
Mljet National Park
Lastovo archipelago nature parkOfficial website  (in Croatian)Coordinates: 42°39′13″N 18°05′41″E﻿ / ﻿42.65361°N 18.09472°E﻿ / 42.65361; 18.09472
