The South South (often hyphenated to the South-South) is the one of the six geopolitical zones of Nigeria representing both a geographic and political region of the country's eastern coast. It comprises six states – Akwa Ibom, Bayelsa, Cross River, Delta, Edo, and Rivers. 
The zone stretches along the Atlantic seaboard from the Bight of Benin coast in the west to the Bight of Bonny coast in the east. It encloses much of the Niger Delta, which is instrumental in the environment and economic development of the region. Geographically, the zone is divided with the Central African mangroves in the coastal far south while the major inland ecoregions are–from east to west–the Cross–Sanaga–Bioko coastal forests, Cross–Niger transition forests, Niger Delta swamp forests, and Nigerian lowland forests.
Although the South South represents only ~5% of Nigerian territory, it contributes greatly to the Nigerian economy due to extensive oil and natural gas reserves. The region has a population of about 26 million people, around 12% of the total population of the country. Port Harcourt and Benin City are the most populous cities in the South South as well as the fourth and fifth most populous cities in Nigeria. Port Harcourt and its suburbs, together called Greater Port Harcourt, form the largest metropolitan area in the zone with about 3 million people; other large South-South cities include (in order by population) Warri, Calabar, Uyo, Ikot Ekpene, Ugep, Sapele, Buguma, Uromi, Ughelli, Ikom, and Asaba.
The South South Region was created from  both the Western and Eastern regions of Nigeria on 27 May 1967, by the regime of General Yakubu Gowon.
Edo and Delta states formerly Bendel state from the Western region, while Bayelsa, Rivers, Akwa Ibom and Cross river states from the Eastern region.
Akwa Ibom
Ibibio
Annang
Efik-Ibibio
Oro language
Obolo language
Bayelsa
Izon
Ogbia
Epie
Cross River
Efik
Humono
Yala
Nde-nsele-nta
Boki
Etung
Legbo-Agbo
Ejagham
Ekoi
Ekajuk
Yakurr
Efut
Delta
Enuani
Urhobo
Isoko
Ika
Ukwuani
Itsekiri
Igbo
Ndokwa
Yoruba
Izon etc.
Edo
Esan
Etsako
Ika Igbanke
Bini
Rivers
Andoni
Okrika
Kalabari
Engenni
Ikwerre
Ogba
Etche .
Ekpeye
Ndoki
Igbo
Ukwuani
Egbema
ijaw
Nkoro
Ogoni
Degema
Abua
OdualThere are multiple different tribes in this area such as Ika, itshekiri Ukwuani Aniocha, Ijaw, Urhobo, Isoko, Ozanogogo, and Abavo.


