Ohio University is a public research university in Athens, Ohio. The first university chartered by an Act of Congress and the first to be chartered in Ohio, it was chartered in 1787 by the Congress of the Confederation and subsequently approved for the territory in 1802 and state in 1804, opening for students in 1809. Ohio University is the oldest university in Ohio, the tenth oldest public university in the United States and the 32nd oldest among public and private universities. As of fall 2020, the university's total enrollment at Athens was slightly more than 18,000, while the all-campus enrollment was just over 28,000.
Ohio University offers more than 250 areas of undergraduate study as well as certificates, master's and doctoral degrees. Undergraduate admissions are selective with further admission requirements for its journalism and other select schools. The Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine maintains separate select admissions criteria and is the most selective college at the university. The university is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission and classified among "R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity". Since 2008, 16 students have won the Barry M. Goldwater Scholarship, 32 students have won the NSF-GRFP and 94 students have become Fulbright Program U.S. grantees and one Alumnus has shared the Nobel Prize.
Ohio's athletic teams are called the Bobcats and compete in the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) at the Division I level as charter members of the Mid-American Conference. Ohio football has participated in 13 bowl games through the 2019 season.  The men's basketball team has made 14 appearances in the NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship, with their most recent appearance coming in 2021.
George Washington stated "the settlement of southeastern Ohio was not accidental, but the result of the careful deliberation of wise, prudent, and patriotic men."  The Confederation Congress, which operated under the Articles of Confederation, did not work with an executor or cabinet.  Executive roles transacted from committees of Congress or appointed persons.  The Ordinance of 1787 made Ohio University the first ever to be chartered through acts of Congress, with the very purpose of expanding education.  Additionally, the 1787 ordinance stated:
"Religion, morality and knowledge being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind, schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged."
This phrase is engraved on the university's main college gateway.
The university was first envisioned by Manasseh Cutler, credited as the school's founder along with Revolutionary War Brigadier General Rufus Putnam.  In addition to being instrumental in its founding, Putnam was also an original trustee of the university.  Putnam Hall there is named for him.   Cutler had served as a chaplain in Washington's Continental Army. The institution's first name was American University.  President Thomas Jefferson's policy initiatives included a westward expansion of the new nation, with the addition of several territories to U.S. statehood.
In 1797, settlers from Marietta traveled downstream on the Ohio River and up the Hocking River to establish a location for the school, founding Athens due to its location directly between the original capital of Chillicothe and Marietta.  In 1802 approval was granted by the territorial government for the establishment of the American Western University, but the school was not operated under that name.
Ohio University was recognized by the new state on February 18, 1804, as its charter was certified by the General Assembly of the new state. This last approval happened eleven months after Ohio was admitted to the Union.  The first three students enrolled in 1809.  The first two bachelor's degrees were granted in 1815.
Ohio University was closed between 1843 and 1848.  Women were first admitted to the university in 1868. In 1874, the Ohio General Assembly strongly supported the new Ohio State University in Columbus and proposed that both Ohio University and Miami University be demoted to preparatory schools. In 1880, it was instead suggested that Ohio and Miami be merged directly with Ohio State, but the 1896 Sleeper Bill provided annual support for the university from the state, allowing for Ohio University's survival and elevation to being a state university.  A second challenge was defeated in 1906.
The 20th century saw dramatic growth in student enrollment, academic offerings, and research facilities.  Between 1955 and 1970, undergraduate enrollment tripled from 7,000 to 20,000. During this era, the campus grew, with the construction of 25 new dormitories located on two new residential college greens, with radio and television stations, research and classroom facilities, and the construction of the 13,000-seat Convocation Center arena. Ohio University ranks among the top 30 largest residential college campuses in the United States.
Ohio restructured its two colleges into five in 1935, establishing the colleges of Commerce, Fine Arts, and Applied Science in addition to the existing colleges of Arts & Sciences and  Education. The graduate college was created in 1936, and the first Ph.D. program was initiated in 1956 in chemistry.
Starting mid–century, the university also began to establish regional campuses throughout southeast Ohio. The first, Ohio University – Chillicothe, was opened in 1946 to help eliminate post-World War II overcrowding on the university's main campus. The school began with 281 students, 70 percent of which were armed services veterans. Later campuses would come in 1946 at Zanesville, 1956 in Ironton and Lancaster, 1957 in St. Clairsville, and 2006 in Proctorville.
In 1964, U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson publicly referenced his Great Society initiative for the first time on the College Green, giving the university exposure across America and internationally. On May 4, 1970, the Ohio National Guard was ordered to open fire on students demonstrating against the Vietnam War at Kent State University, killing 4 and wounding 9. At the same time, there were sit-ins and anti-war riots at Ohio University, even more intense than those of Kent State. This was partly due to the administration's refusal to close the university; instead of going home, many students from other Ohio universities that did close came to Athens to protest further. When the Ohio National Guard was called in to Athens, there was a 3-hour battle at the Baker Center, resulting in 23 injured and 54 arrested students. On May 15, campus was closed.
Alden Library was completed in 1969. In 1975, Ohio established its medical school, known as the Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine. Heritage is the only medical school in the state to award the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree. In 1979, on the university's 175th anniversary, Chubu University of Japan donated 175 cherry trees.
The Ohio University Innovation Center, a technology business incubator, started in 1983. The Ohio University Edison Biotechnology Institute was founded in 1984. In the Glidden administration, from 1994 to 2004, new construction included the Life Sciences Research Facility, Emeriti Park, Walter Hall, plus major renovations to Gordy Hall, Grover Center, and Memorial Auditorium; the expansion of Bentley Hall and Copeland Hall; and  groundwork for the new Baker Center that opened in 2007.
In Fall 2012, Ohio University converted its academic calendar from quarters to semesters, after first having changed to quarters in 1967.
The university is a residential campus in Athens, Ohio, overlooking the Hocking River.  Constructed under the Jefferson presidency, New England and Early Americana Federalist themes are prevalent in the university's earliest architecture.  Development of the campus began in 1812 with the erection of the university's central building, Manasseh Cutler Hall, a registered national landmark, and built only 20 years after the White House. Cutler Hall's University Chimes, replacing an existing old cast iron bell (and arguably the 3rd oldest university bell in America), chime at noon and on the hour between classes. The original bell, cast in the very early 1800s, served the university faithfully for well over a century.
The historic College Green is the central quadrangle lawn and location of significant campus buildings: Manasseh Cutler Hall, the Office of the President; Wilson Hall, the College of Arts and Sciences; McGuffey Hall, named for William McGuffey; and the College Gateway.  These three original primary structures are featured elements of the official current university logo and maintain true to their original design of over 200 years ago. The College Green has changed little in the past two centuries, which contributes to the university's colonial appearance. The green, inspired by the university founders, is based upon the classic layout of traditional English and New England towns and similar to university quadrangles.
The College Green features Galbreath Chapel, the spire of which, topped with a brass weather vane, is modeled after that of the portico of Nash's All Souls Church in London. Other buildings on the College Green include Chubb Hall, home to Undergraduate Admissions as well as the Offices of the Bursar and Registrar; Ellis Hall, home to the departments of English, Classics, Religious Studies, and Philosophy; Templeton-Blackburn Memorial Auditorium; as well as Bryan Hall, an upperclassman residence hall. The University Sundial, located behind Galbreath Chapel, was constructed in 1907 and marks the original location of the university's first building.
The College Green is framed by two main university gateways. Alumni Gateway, built in 1915, features the text "That thou Mayest Grow In Knowledge, Wisdom and Love", borrowed from the Latin phrase inscribed over a gateway to the University of Padua and was dedicated upon the 100th anniversary of the university's first graduating class.  The newer College Gate, built in the 1960s, features words taken from the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 regarding public education. Traditions surrounding College Green include the latter half of first year convocation, where students, led by the Ohio University Marching 110, march up Richland Avenue, onto Presidents Street, turning north onto Court Street, and entering the Green through the College Gate at the corner of Court and Union Streets. From there, a large involvement fair is held where students find their clubs they wish to be involved with.
The John Calhoun Baker University Center, which opened in January 2007, is named after the 14th president of the university. The facility replaced the original Baker Center located on East Union Street across from College Green and serves as the hub of campus activity.  Electronic maps and virtual university e-tours, available at center information desks and online, direct visitors across campus.
The building features a modified Federal architecture and large windows that admit natural light and afford expansive views of the campus. In contrast to the exterior's red brick and white columns, the interior has a more contemporary style with high domed ceilings. Terrazzo mosaics of aspects of the earth's globe are embedded in the atrium of the main entrance to the building.
Baker Center contains a large food court called West 82; a pub bistro called Latitude 39; a Grand Ballroom; The Honors Collegium, The Wall of Presidents, the Bobcat Student Lounge, a shop called Bobcat Depot that sells apparel, computers, and accessories; a theater seating 400; study areas; computer labs; administrative offices; and numerous conference rooms. The Front Room, a large coffee house named after a former popular university rathskeller, features a stage, artwork and a community fireplace. It serves Starbucks products and university bakery items and is housed on the fourth floor, which opens onto its own outside terrace as well as onto the intersection of Park Place and Court Streets, making it a hot spot for students between classes. Other amenities include a United States Post Office and the Trisolini Art Gallery, named after a prominent fine arts faculty member.
Vernon R. Alden Library serves the Athens campus as the central library facility. There are several, smaller libraries within other academic buildings that serve various departments and programs. As well as smaller, specialized specific collection libraries within the Vernon R. Alden Library building. University Librarians work for different departments and all are experts in some discipline of their own choosing. This gives students access to produce their own original research and assistance when needed. Many Ohio University courses require students to utilize the library and librarians to produce their own original writing and many go on to publish their works with the help of the librarians. There is a library annex building which is located on Columbus Road in Athens, which houses preservation and other offices. Also housed within Alden Library, The Ohio University Press is Ohio University's publishing company, located on the first floor. Each regional campus has their own library and printed text collections complete with their own staff and various librarians. The collection of OHIO's library contains over 2.3 million units of microfilm material, 13,500 periodical subscriptions and more than 4 million printed volumes, making it one of the 100 largest libraries in the United States. Alden Library was the first in the world to generate an electronic library record in 1971. The university maintains a complex system of archives in its libraries.  The Robert E. and Jean R. Mahn Center for Archives and Special Collections maintains and displays rare books and collections, including a 14th-century Gutenberg Bible. Laptops and other accessories are available through technology services at the reference desk. Outside Alden Library and directly behind Cutler Hall is Wolfe Garden, a small enclave in the shape of the State of Ohio, and features native Ohio trees and plants.
There are twelve residence halls on East Green.  This area of the university is the oldest residential green and includes three of the steepest walkways at the hilly Athens campus:  Morton Hill, the Bryan Hall terrace and staircase, and Jefferson Hill.  Each walkway affords East Green residents access to classrooms if they are willing to walk or bicycle. East Green is also home to Shively Court, a newly renovated dining hall with dine-in, take-out, and grab-and-go options.
One of the newest additions to East Green is Jefferson Marketplace, which features the following concepts:
Brick City Deli, a New York-style deli
The Ohio Café, featuring Peet's Coffee
Steeped & Stirred, a tea and coffee room
The Culinary Studio, a demonstration kitchen that serves as a televised learning lab for students and customers
Veggie Butcher and Juiced, a section of the market for produce to be washed, cut, and juiced
A campus grocery market with food, beverages, health and beauty products, and school suppliesSouth Green includes areas near Emeriti Park, and extends along the Hocking River valley. There are eighteen residence halls on South Green, following the addition of four new residence halls in the summer of 2015.
South Green is home to several facilities, including:
Nelson Court, the university's largest dining hall with an adjacent market and coffee shop, South Side Espresso Bar.
Peden Stadium, the university's football field and the oldest football venue in the Mid-American conference, adjacent to a new multipurpose indoor training facility, Walter Fieldhouse.  It is a designated Official Ohio Historical Site by the Ohio Historical society.
Bird Ice Arena, home to the Ohio University hockey team, recreational skating, and academic skating classes.
Ohio University Aquatic Center, home to the university's swimming and diving teams.The Charles J. Ping Center is one of the largest recreational facilities in the nation. Covering 168,000 square feet (15,600 m) on three floors, Ping houses a 36-foot (11 m), double-sided climbing wall, five basketball/volleyball courts, two multipurpose gymnasiums, an elevated four-lane indoor running track, eight racquetball courts and an enclosed glass fitness area. Ping Center also provides free weight and cardio rooms, aerobics and fitness classes, combative sports, dance, meeting rooms and personal training. The recreation center also houses club sports and intramural sports.  Construction began in 1994 and it opened in January 1996. Ping was named in honor of the 18th president of Ohio University, Charles J. Ping. Ping is also one of the largest student employers on campus.
West Green includes buildings around the western part of the Athens campus. The Ohio Athletic Mall spans the western portion of the campus, near the end of the Athens bike path at the Union street crossing.  The mall features lacrosse, baseball, track, field and related athletic venues. Along the surrounding Hocking River is a series of sakura trees planted to commemorate the university's historic partnership with Chubu University. Japanese Students sponsor an annual "Sakura Festival" each year, a cultural event celebrating the visually dramatic blossoming of the cherry trees and their evening lightings. Nearby Bicentennial Park features Input,  a landscape artwork by artist Maya Lin.
Anchoring the West Green quadrangle is the Stocker Center, which houses the Russ College of Engineering and Technology.
There are eight residence halls on the West Green.  The West Green also includes:
The District on West Green, a dining hall with various options, including a kitchen for those with dietary restrictions. Boyd Market is located just outside the District on West Green and provides convenient shopping for the university community, as well as Smooth Moves, a smoothie bar.
Academic and Research Center
Ohio Softball Field, home to the softball team.
Goldsberry Track, home to the track and field teams.
Bob Wren Stadium, home to baseball team.
Chessa Field, home to the women's soccer program.
Pruitt Field, home to the field hockey team.The Ridges, formerly Athens Mental Hospital, was acquired by the university. The Victorian styled area has since been re-purposed as a university complex of classrooms and administrative offices surrounded by a large nature preserve. Additionally, a new planetary observatory is located nearby.
Gordon K. Bush Airport
Edwards Accelerator Laboratory, a particle accelerator used for nuclear physics and astrophysics research.
The Athena Cinema, an on-campus, early art deco styled century-old movie theater owned by the university.
Lausche Heating Plant, an on-campus plant that provides heat to all buildings on campus.The first regional campus, Ohio University – Chillicothe, was opened in 1946 to help eliminate post-World War II overcrowding on the university's main campus. The school began with 281 students, 70 percent of which were armed services veterans. Today, more than 9,800 students attend Ohio University's five regional campuses:
Ohio University Chillicothe – 1946
Ohio University Zanesville – 1946
Ohio University Lancaster – 1956
Ohio University Southern (Ironton) – 1956
Ohio University Eastern (St. Clairsville) – 1957In addition, Ohio University also has an educational centers that is an extension of the Southern Campus, Ohio University Proctorville Center, opened in 2006.
The Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine operates two campuses in addition to Athens:
Dublin, which includes an extension campus in addition to a medical campus
Cleveland, which is affiliated with the Cleveland ClinicThe total university student enrollment is in excess of 36,000, encompassing its main campus in Athens and regional campuses; its body mostly hails from the Mid-Atlantic and Midwest and graduated from public high schools. The Chronicle of Higher Education has recognized the university as one of the top producers of U.S. Fulbright scholars by type of institution, with the highest number of recipients in the state as well as the Mid-American Conference in 2011–12.  Ohio University was recognized by the U.S. Department of State's Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs as a top producer of 2014–2015 Fulbright U.S. Students.
The university honor code includes the traditional pillars of character, citizenship, civility, commitment, and community.  Freshmen formally enter the university with their annual convocation and march beneath Alumni Gateway along with university officials.
Ohio faculty has achievements ranging from the first university to successfully accomplish a trans 
genetic DNA injection, to Francis Bundy's work on early synthesis of diamond to Paul Murray Kendall's celebrated biography of Richard III. Some sense of research achievements at Ohio University can be seen in the biographies of the Edwin and Ruth Kennedy  Distinguished Professors appointed annually since 1959.
Admission to Ohio University is classified as "selective" by both the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education and U.S. News & World Report. The Princeton Review gives Ohio an "Admissions Selectivity Rating" of 81. The college extends offers of admission to 87% of all applicants after holistic review that includes examination of academic rigor, performance and admissions test scores.
Of all matriculating students, the average high school GPA is 3.58. The interquartile range for SAT scores in math and reading are 520-620 and 530-630 respectively, while the range for ACT scores is 21-26.
The university is organized into 12 academic divisions.
The College of Arts & Sciences is the largest academic division at the university, host to a broad range of liberal arts courses in the humanities, the social sciences, and the natural sciences as the foundation for all undergraduate degrees.
The Scripps College of Communication comprises five schools and one research lab: The E.W. Scripps School of Journalism, the J. W. McClure School of Information and Telecommunication Systems, the School of Communication Studies, the School of Media Arts and Studies (formerly the School of Telecommunications), the School of Visual Communication (VisCom), and the Game Research and Immersive Design (GRID) Lab.
The College of Fine Arts offers academic programs in art, dance, film, interdisciplinary arts, music, and theater.  The university's marching band, The Ohio University Marching 110, is based out of the College of Fine Arts, and is currently under the direction of Dr. Richard Suk.  The Ohio University School of Music celebrated its 100th anniversary in 2017. The university's film program is located within the School of Dance, Film, and Theater in the College of Fine Arts. The Kennedy Museum of Art is housed at the Ridges in Lin Hall.
The history of the Patton College of Education dates back to May 11, 1886. The Normal Department – the predecessor to today's College of Education – was the first state-supported teacher preparation program in Ohio. The state's first kindergarten opened on the Ohio University campus in 1907. Today, the College of Education is organized into three departments: Counseling and Higher Education, Educational Studies, and Teacher Education. The college currently serves more than 2,100 undergraduate and 800 graduate students.  On July 1, 2010, The Patton College became the home of several programs previously housed in the College of Health and Human Services, creating two new departments: Human and Consumer Science Education, and Recreation and Sport Pedagogy.
The Honors Tutorial College offers programs in 34 disciplines, ranging from journalism to astrophysics. The Office of Nationally Competitive Awards is housed in the college. It is based on the British tutorial system typically found at undergraduate colleges, where students are placed either one on one or in small group instruction.
Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine was established in 1975. It is the only osteopathic medical college in the state, and offers the degree Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.).  The college is accredited by the American Osteopathic Association. In 1993, Barbara Ross-Lee, D.O., was appointed to the position of dean of the Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine; she was the first African-American woman to serve as the dean of a U.S. medical school. In 2014, alongside pre-eminent training partner OhioHealth, the college opened a second medical school campus in Dublin, Ohio. In 2015, the college opened a third campus in affiliation with Cleveland Clinic at Cleveland Clinic South Pointe Hospital in Warrensville Heights, Ohio. Approximately 120 medical students train at the Athens campus, 70 in Dublin and 60 in Cleveland.
University College was established in 2004. The college comprises students who design a major program with faculty approval and awards the Bachelor of Specialized Studies (B.S.S.) degree. The University College faculty are from various disciplines.
Several research programs and institutes allow students to learn from scientists and scholars who are actively engaged in advancing their disciplines. Ohio University's Board of Trustees-approved research centers and institutes cover a broad range of disciplines.
The Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine sponsors the Institute for Neuromusculoskeletal Research, Tropical Disease Institute, Edison Biotechnology Institute, and Appalachian Rural Health Institute.
In Engineering and Technology, Ohio sponsors the Institute for Sustainable Energy and the Environment, the Center for Advanced Materials Processing, the Center for Advanced Software Systems Integration, the Automatic Identification Education and Research Center, the Avionics Engineering Research Center, the Institute for Corrosion & Multiphase Technology, the Center for Intelligent, Distributed and Dependable Systems, the Ohio Research Institute for Transportation and the Environment, and the T. Richard and Eleanora K. Robe Leadership Institute. The Condensed Matter and Surface Science program supports research in condensed matter and materials physics. The Nanoscale and Quantum Phenomena Institute (NQPI) supports research in diverse aspects of nanoscience and quantum mechanical phenomena in nature.
The College of Arts & Sciences sponsors the African American Research and Service Institute, the Astrophysical Institute, the Contemporary History Institute, the Charles J. Ping Institute for the Teaching of the Humanities, Center for Intelligent Chemical Instrumentation, the Nanoscale and Quantum Phenomena Institute, the Institute for Applied and Professional Ethics, Institute for the Empirical Study of Language, the Institute of Nuclear and Particle Physics, the Ohio University Cartographic Center, the Institute for Quantitative Biology, and the Center for Ring Theory and Its Applications. The Center for International Studies was established in 1964. The George Washington Forum on Ideas  sponsors discussion on a broad range of topics.
The College of Business sponsors the center for eBusiness, the Center for International Business Education and Development, the Ohio University Insurance Institute,, and the Center for Sports Administration. and the Schey Sales Center. The university also has a business incubator and innovation center.
In Scripps College of Communications disciplines, Ohio sponsors the Institute for International Journalism, the Scripps Survey Research Center, the Telecommunications Center, and the Institute for Telecommunication Studies. The College of Communication also sponsors the Game Research and Immersive Design (GRID) Lab, an initiative of its Scripps College of Communication, providing Ohioans the training, education, and opportunity to develop technical and creative skills with digital game technology. The GRID Lab serves as an innovative and creative center for undergraduate and graduate students, faculty, and staff research and project development. It was founded by various faculty and staff from the School of Media Arts and Studies.
In Education, Ohio sponsors the Center for Cooperative Curriculum Development and Partnerships, the Institute for Democracy in Education, the George Hill Center for Counseling & Research, the Center for Higher Education, the Child Development Center, and the Edward Stevens Center for the Study and Development of Literacy and Language.
University sports began in 1894 with an 8–0 loss to Marietta College in football. The university competes in the major National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) at the Division I level and is a charter member of the Mid-American Conference (MAC), established in 1946, and remains the sole charter member competing in the conference. University intercollegiate athletics include six men's squads and eight women's squads.  At the national level, Ohio University defeated 4th-seeded Michigan in the 2012 NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament.  They followed up that with a 62–56 win over 12th-seeded South Florida, reaching the Sweet Sixteen for the first time since 1964.
All university sporting events are open to students at no additional charge.
Ohio's men's and women's athletics teams compete under the official colors of hunter green and white. The school mascot is Rufus the Bobcat, and a life-sized sculpture of a bobcat stands poised at the entrance to Peden Stadium.
Ohio Bobcats football began in 1894 with an 8-0 loss to Marietta College. Since then, the Bobcats have posted a 584–580–65 (.502) record and a 252-248-12 record in the Mid-American Conference. The current coach is Tim Albin.
Peden Stadium, built in 1929, is the oldest football venue in the MAC and among the oldest in the nation. Located on the south of Ohio University's campus in Athens, the venue has a seating capacity of 24,000. Many recent renovation and expansion efforts have allowed the stadium to keep pace with the ever-changing landscape of college football stadiums. As such, Peden Stadium is nicknamed "The Wrigley Field of College Football". The stadium brought its largest crowd on September 8, 2012, when 25,893 fans were in attendance to watch the Bobcats decisively beat the New Mexico State Aggies by a score of 51-24. This mark overtook the previous record set on September 5, 2009, when 24,617 fans were in attendance to watch the Bobcats drop a 23-16 decision to the Connecticut Huskies.
The Bobcats have won five MAC Football championships in 1953, 1960, 1963, 1967, and 1968, and MAC East Division championships in 2006, 2009, and 2011. Prior to joining the MAC, the Bobcats won six Buckeye Athletic Association championships in 1929, 1930, 1931, 1935, 1936, and 1938. In 1960, the Bobcats were crowned National Small College Champions after compiling a 10-0 record under Coach Bill Hess. The Bobcats have appeared in six bowl games, losing 15-14 to West Texas State in the 1962 Sun Bowl, losing 49-42 to Richmond in the 1968 Tangerine Bowl, falling 28-7 to Southern Mississippi in the 2007 GMAC Bowl, losing 21-17 to Marshall in the 2009 Little Caesars Pizza Bowl, and losing to Troy in the 2010 New Orleans Bowl, 48-21, before finally winning a bowl game in the 2011 Famous Idaho Potato Bowl against Utah State, 24-23.
The 13,080-seat Convocation Center serves as home to the university's men's and women's basketball  teams, as well as women's volleyball teams.
The first Ohio basketball game occurred in 1907 when the Bobcats defeated the Parkersburg YMCA 46-9. Since that day, Ohio has posted a .571 winning percentage over their 100-year history and a .566 winning percentage in their 65 years in the Mid-American Conference. The Bobcats have won 7 Mid-American Conference tournament titles in 1983, 1985, 1994, 2005, 2010, 2012, and 2021. As well as 10 MAC regular-season titles in 1960, 1961, 1964, 1965, 1970, 1972, 1974, 1985, 1994, and 2013. Prior to joining the MAC, the 'Cats won an Ohio Athletic Conference title in 1921 and three Buckeye Athletic Association championships in 1931, 1933, and 1937. In addition, Ohio has played in the NCAA Tournament 14 times, appearing in 1960, 1961, 1964, 1965, 1970, 1972, 1974, 1983, 1985, 1994, 2005, 2010, 2012, and 2021. The Bobcats have been selected for the National Invitation Tournament 5 times in 1941 (runner-up), 1969, 1986, 1995, and 2013, while also appearing in the College Basketball Invitational in 2008 and 2016, they made 2 appearances in the CollegeInsider.com Postseason Tournament in 2011 and 2014. As a result of the storied tradition of Ohio Bobcats basketball, the program was recently ranked 86th in Street & Smith's 100 Greatest Basketball Programs of All Time, published in 2005. The current coach is Jeff Boals.
The women's basketball team has won three MAC Tournaments (1986, 1995, 2015) since beginning play in 1973 and starting MAC play in 1982. They have reached the NCAA Tournament in those three championship years. They have four MAC conferences (1986, 1995, 2015, 2016) and four-division championships (2015, 2016, 2019, 2020).The women's team was the first team to win 30 games during the 2018-19 season going 30-6 losing in the quarterfinals of the 2019 WNIT. The current coach is Bob Boldon.
There are 36 active club sports programs at Ohio, run out of the Department of Campus Recreation. Club sports include sports for both genders, including co-ed sports.
Students operate a newspaper, television, and radio stations at Ohio University.  The main newspaper, The Post, publishes in print once a week and online all days of the week while the university is in session, and is officially independent of the university and its administration.
Ohio University Public Television is a PBS affiliate broadcasting on WOUB Athens/WOUC Cambridge. In addition to national PBS programs, WOUB features Newswatch, a nightly news broadcast with student reporters. Other student produced programs include Gridiron Glory (following the Southeastern Ohio and parts of West Virginia high school football season, the recipient of many Emmys) and Bobcat Blitz (following the Ohio Bobcats during the year). WOUB also airs The OUtlet, a radio show and podcast featuring stories wherever "campus meets community."
WOUB-FM 91.3 Athens, WOUC-FM 89.1 Cambridge, WOUH-FM 91.9 Chillicothe, WOUL-FM 89.1 Ironton, and WOUZ-FM 90.1 Zanesville broadcast the same programs throughout southeastern Ohio. Separate public radio programming is also heard in Athens on WOUB AM 1340. ACRN ("The Rock Lobster"), founded in 1971, is an Internet radio-only station and the university's only student-run radio station.
Ohio University has an amateur radio (also known as ham radio) club, the Ohio University Amateur Radio Club, call sign W8PZS, that operates out of Stocker Center.
The New Political is a web publication with the latest news on campus and state politics. Thread Magazine is the fashion quarterly and Backdrop is the campus periodical about pop culture; both are written by undergraduates.
OHIO Today is the official university magazine for alumni and friends, and OHIO Women is its female-reader digest.  
The university also publishes the OHIO News page, the institution's official online news and information resource.  OHIO Forum is the official online publication of the College of Arts & Sciences.
OIT (Ohio Information Technology) is the university tech depot and help desk, responsible for a wide range of duties from CatMail (campus email) to hosting official websites.
Students maintain a variety of organized and independent service events.  The Community Service Leadership Council involves students to oversee a Project of the Week every Saturday.  The projects have included work with Good Earth Farms, Last Chance Corral, Cadillac Ranch, Habitat for Humanity, Alpha Delta Pi, Alpha Phi Omega, Pi Beta Phi, Project C, Rotaract, the Survivor Advocacy Program, and the Thursday Supper Volunteer Corps, among others.  Charities at Ohio University have involved flag football tournaments and the 5K Flour Run, and have benefited O'Bleness Health System's Women's Health Fund and the Athens Backpack Program, respectively.  Student Senate's Beautification Day regularly receives a large turnout and is particularly unique in the Spring.  In early 1962, President Vernon Alden signed the first of several contracts with the federal government to facilitate Peace Corps volunteer training programs.  Today, Ohio University hosts a recruiting office for the Peace Corps in a tradition affiliated with that organization since Sargent Shriver's visit.
Like many universities in Ohio, Ohio University maintains its own police department.  Operating out of 118 Ridges Circle (the Ridges, Building 13, first floor), the Ohio University Police Department (OUPD) is a fully-fledged, independent law enforcement agency with 31 sworn officers, five dispatchers, and two administrative support personnel.  They have patrol and investigative divisions, two explosive detective canine teams, a SWAT team, and are members of the Athens-Hocking-Fairfield Major Crimes Unit.
OUPD was certified with the Ohio Collaborative on January 27, 2017.
Ohio has over 300,000 living alumni.  Alumni have been recognized by a variety of prestigious awards and positions.  Presidents of countries, Nobel Prize winners, senators, Pulitzer Prize winners, generals and astronauts are counted among its ranks.  Included are Loring Miner, who discovered the Spanish flu; Sir Venkatraman Ramakrishnan, recipient of the 2009 Nobel Prize in Chemistry and president of the Royal Society; George Voinovich, former Ohio governor and U.S. senator for Ohio; and Thomas Ewing, first graduate of Ohio University, the first Secretary of the Interior, a U.S. senator for Ohio and Secretary of the Treasury under U.S. President William Henry Harrison, to name a few of many distinguished alumni.  Eighty-four Scripps College of Communication alumni have won or contributed to Pulitzer Prizes.
Official website
"Ohio, University of" . Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921.
"Ohio University" . New International Encyclopedia. 1905.