The Boston University School of Medicine (BUSM) is one of the graduate schools of Boston University. Founded in 1848, the medical school  was the first institution in the world to formally educate female physicians. Originally known as the New England Female Medical College, it was subsequently renamed BUSM in 1873. In 1864, it became the first medical school in the United States to award an M.D. degree to an African-American woman.
BUSM is the only medical school located in the South End neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts. Boston Medical Center, its primary teaching hospital, operates the largest 24-hour Level I trauma center in New England, and the largest network of regional community health centers.
Boston University School of Medicine is the home of the  Framingham Heart Study, from which all knowledge of cardiovascular disease risk factors were originally discovered. Notable alumni of the medical school include Marcia Angell, former editor-in-chief of the  New England Journal of Medicine and the only woman to hold the position in the journal's almost 200-year history, as well as Louis Wade Sullivan, former Secretary of the US Department of Health and Human Services and founder of Morehouse School of Medicine. Boston University School of Medicine is ranked 29th on the 2019 list of Best Medical Schools in the Best Research category by the U.S. News & World Report.
The New England Female Medical College was the first institution to medically train women, founded in 1848.  The institution was reformed and renamed in 1873 when Boston University merged with the New England Female Medical College.
In the autumn of 2019, BUSM's first-year medical students were 48% female, and 14% were of an ethnicity that is under-represented in medicine.  Out of matriculated students, 124 are in the traditional 4-year Doctor of Medicine (MD) program. Average GPA was 3.69. Six students were enrolled in the MD-PhD program, and the rest were in some other type of non-traditional MD track. BUSM also offers joint degrees with other Boston University graduate schools, allowing the medical students to earn an MD degree with a Master of Business Administration (MBA), Master of Public Health (MPH), or PhD.
Students matriculating came from 29 states and 19 countries. Average MCAT was 517. Students' ages ranged from 18 to 35.
There are 1,159 faculty members at BU's School of Medicine: 946 full-time and 213 part-time. Notable faculty include:
Andrew E. Budson (2005-present), Professor of Neurology
Alfred I. Tauber (1982–present), recipient of the 2008 Science Medal awarded by the University of Bologna
Karen H. Antman (2005–present), professor of medicine, Provost and Dean
Osamu Shimomura (1982–present), 2008 recipient of the Nobel Prize in ChemistryMarcia Angell (MD'67), Former editor of the New England Journal of Medicine
Jennifer Berman, sexual health expert, urologist, and female sexual medicine specialist
Rebecca Lee Crumpler (MD1864), the first African-American to receive an M.D. in the United States and a graduate of the New England Female College (1848–1873), which merged with Boston University in 1873
Franklin Ware Mann (MD1880) – pioneering ballistics researcher and inventor of the Mann rest adopted by the National Institute of Standards and Technology and Aberdeen Proving Ground
Fe Del Mundo (MS'40), National Scientist of the Philippines
Ralph David Feigin (MD'62), Current Physician-in-Chief of the Texas Children's Hospital
I Michael Leitman (MD'85) American surgeon and Dean for Graduate Medical Education, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
Edward Ross Ritvo (MD'55), autism researcher, Neuropsychiatric Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA
Louis Wade Sullivan (MD'58), President of the Morehouse School of Medicine and former U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services
Louis Weinstein (MD'43), microbiologist and infectious disease physician
Lawrence Yannuzzi (MD'64), angiography pioneerBUSM offers MA, MS, and PhD degrees through Graduate Medical Sciences (GMS).  GMS offers the MA degree in Mental Health Counseling and Behavioral Medicine.  An MS degree is available in Anatomy and Neurobiology - Vesalius Program, Bioimaging, Biomedical Forensics, Biomedical Research Technologies, Clinical Research, Forensic Anthropology, Genetic Counseling. Health Professions Education, Healthcare Emergency Management, Medical Anthropology & Cross Cultural Practice, Medical Sciences, Nutrition and Metabolism, Oral Health Sciences, Pathology Laboratory Sciences, Physician Assistant, and Physiology and Biophysics.
GMS also grants PhD or MD-PhD degrees in the following areas:
Boston University School of Medicine and the Boston Medical Center serve as the setting for Robin Cook's bestselling novel Coma as well as the film of the same name directed by Michael Crichton.
Boston Medical Center
Goldman School of Dental Medicine
Boston University School of Public Health
Boston University Medical CampusBoston University School of Medicine
Graduate Medical Sciences
Samuel Gregory. Letter to Ladies, in Favor of Female Physicians for their Own Sex (Boston: Published by The New England Female Medical College, 1856).Coordinates: 42°20′10″N 71°04′22″W﻿ / ﻿42.336°N 71.0727°W﻿ / 42.336; -71.0727
