Macedonian cuisine (Greek: Μακεδονική κουζίνα) is the cuisine of the region of Macedonia in northern Greece. Contemporary Greek Macedonian cooking shares much with general Greek and wider Balkan and Mediterranean cuisine, including dishes from the Ottoman past. Specific influences include dishes of the Anatolian Greek, Aromanian and Megleno-Romanian, Slavic, Armenian and Sephardi Jewish population. The mix of the different people inhabiting the region gave the name to the Macedonian salad.
A continuation from the ancient period are dishes such as lamb cooked with quince or various vegetables and fruits, goat boiled or fried in olive oil: modern recipes from Kavala to Kastoria and Kozani offer lamb with quince, pork with celery or leeks.
The arrival of Greek refugees from Asia Minor and Constantinople in the early 20th century brought also Anatolian and Constantinopolitan elements in the cuisine of the region. 
Some current specialties are trahanas with crackling, phyllo-based pies (cheese, leek, spinach) and meat plates (such as pork, wild boar and buffalo). Others are tyrokafteri (Macedonian spicy cheese spread) and soupies krasates (cuttlefishes in wine). Unlike Athens, the traditional pita bread for the popular souvlaki usually is not grilled, but rather fried. (Information included from 'Greek Gastronomy', GNTO, 2004)
Various products are produced from the buffalo meat. There is breeding especially around Lake Kerkini.
Ajvar (Florina), spicy dip
Krokos Kozanis (saffron)
Melintzanosalata
Kavourmas
Kolokythopita (zucchini pie)
Koulouri Thessalonikis (a type of simit)
Kichí of Kozani, a type of tyropita with cheese
Mushrooms (large production around Grevena region)
Manitaropita, mushrooms pie
Pinakotí, bread from Mount Athos
Pastourmas
Skordalia
Spanakorizo
Tahini
Taramosalata
Various cheeses, like Anevato, Kasseri, Manouri, Batzos, Metsovone, Petroto, Kefalograviera and Tirokafteri, a spicy cheese spread or dip made of whipped feta cheese with hot peppers and olive oil
Tirokroketes
Red peppers of Florina: can be roasted, sliced and served by adding olive oil and garlicArni me kydonia, lamb meat with quinces
Arni me spanachi, lamb with spinach (Kavala)
Chirino me selino, pork meat with celery
Mangia (Μάντζα), vegetables
Makálo, meatballs with garlic sauce (Kastoria)
Manitarosoupa, mushrooms soup
Melintzanofai
Misoúra, meat plate
Mussels with saffron
Ospriada Makedoniki, amix of legumes
Petoura (petila), a type of hilopites
Soupies krasates, cuttlefishes in wine
Souvla, Souvlaki and Kontosouvli
Tigania, fried pork
Trahanas, may be soup
Agriogourouno, wild boar meat
Yaprákia, Christmas food in the region of Kozani, meat and rice in pickled cabbage-leaf
Various dishes with buffalo meat
Various fish plates, especially  pestrofa and  grivadi, fished in the lakes of the region
Various types of  loukaniko, sausagesAkanés (Serres)
Armenovíl/Armenonville (Thessaloniki)
Bougatsa
Halvas
Kourkoubinia
Laggites
Moustalevria
Moustopita
Pandespani
Poniró, from Serres
Roxákia
Revaní (Veria)
Sáliaroi (Saliaria) from Kozani
Spoon sweets
Trigona ThessalonikisFrappé coffee, invented in Thessaloniki in 1957 
Retsina
Tsipouro
Wine.Greek cuisine
Greek restaurant
Byzantine cuisine
Ottoman cuisine
Cuisine of the MediterraneanGrigoriadou, Efi (2004). Edesmatologion Makedonias (Recipes from Macedonia). Kohlias publications. ISBN 960-437-007-3.
Moussaka from The English Times of Katerini
(in German) Greek Macedonian Wines
(in German) Greek Macedonian Wines (Info)