Civil law – branch of the law. In common law countries such as England, Wales, and the United States, the term refers to non-criminal law. The law relating to civil wrongs and quasi-contracts is part of the civil law. The law of property is embraced by civil law. Civil law can, like criminal law, be divided into substantive law and procedural law. The rights and duties of individuals amongst themselves is the primary concern of civil law. It is often suggested that civil proceedings are taken for the purpose of obtaining compensation for injury, and may thus be distinguished from criminal proceedings, whose purpose is to inflict punishment. However, exemplary or punitive damages may be awarded in civil proceedings.
Civil law (in common law countries) can be described as all of the following:
Branch of law dealing with non-criminal casesSubstantive law
Art and culture law
Civil rights
Commercial law
Contract law
Australian contract law
Canadian contract law
English contract law
Scots contract law
United States contract law
Labor law
Environmental law
Family law
Property law
Cultural property law
Intellectual property law
Trust law
Tort law
Personal injury
Tort law by common law country
Tort law in Australia
Canadian tort law
English tort law
Scots tort law
United States tort lawProcedural law
Civil procedureHistory of company law in the United Kingdom
History of competition law
History of English contract law
History of equity and trusts
History of labour law
History of labor law in the United States
History of labour law in the United KingdomLawsuit – suit, action, or cause instituted or depending between two private persons in the courts of law.Civil procedure – body of law that sets out the rules and standards that courts follow when adjudicating civil lawsuits (as opposed to procedures in criminal law matters). These rules govern how a lawsuit or case may be commenced, what kind of service of process (if any) is required, the types of pleadings or statements of case, motions or applications, and orders allowed in civil cases, the timing and manner of depositions and discovery or disclosure, the conduct of trials, the process for judgment, various available remedies, and how the courts and clerks must function.
Service of process
Pleading – as practiced in countries that follow the English models, a pleading is a formal written statement of a party's claims or defenses to another party's claims in a civil action. The parties' pleadings in a case define the issues to be adjudicated in the action.
pleading in England and Wales
pleading in United States federal courts
Motions
Motion in United States law
Court orders
Depositions
Discovery
Trial
Judgments
Legal remediesCivil procedure in Brazil
Civil procedure in Canada
Civil procedure in England and Wales
Civil Procedure Rules (CPR)
Civil procedure in South Africa
Civil procedure in the United States
Federal Rules of Civil ProcedureJournal of Tort LawOliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
William BlackstoneOutline of lawDifferences between Civil and Criminal Law in the USA
Civil Cases in US Courts
Civil Procedure Rules applying to England and Wales
Complete text of Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (Cornell Univ.)