The 1985 Toronto Blue Jays season was the franchise's ninth season of Major League Baseball. It resulted in the Blue Jays finishing first in the American League East with a record of 99 wins and 62 losses. The win total of 99 is a franchise record, and the division title was the franchise's first.
Despite having the second-best record in Major League Baseball, the Blue Jays collapsed in the American League Championship Series against the Kansas City Royals, blowing a 3–1 series lead and losing in seven games.
December 3, 1984: Rule 5 draft
Manuel Lee was drafted by the Blue Jays from the Houston Astros.
Lou Thornton was drafted by the Blue Jays from the New York Mets.
December 8, 1984: Alfredo Griffin, Dave Collins, and cash were traded by the Blue Jays to the Oakland Athletics for Bill Caudill.
January 24, 1985: Tom Henke was chosen by the Blue Jays from the Texas Rangers as a Free Agent compensation pick.
January 26, 1985: Jim Gott, Augie Schmidt (minors), and Jack McKnight (minors) were traded by the Blue Jays to the San Francisco Giants for Gary Lavelle.April 27, 1985: Willie Aikens hit a home run in the last at-bat of his career.
July 9, 1985: In a game between the Blue Jays and the Mariners at Seattle, Buck Martinez executed a double play by tagging out two runners at home plate. In the third inning, Phil Bradley was on second when Gorman Thomas singled. Bradley was tagged out at home, on a throw from Jesse Barfield to Martinez. There was a collision between Bradley and Martinez – Martinez broke his ankle. Martinez was sitting on the ground in agony and threw the ball to third base in an attempt to tag out Gorman Thomas. The throw went into left field and Thomas ran towards home plate. Toronto left fielder George Bell threw the ball back to Martinez. He was still seated on the ground in pain but was able to tag Gorman Thomas for the out. Martinez tagged out both runners at home plate.
Dave Stieb led the American League with a 2.48 ERA and pitched 26 consecutive scoreless innings.
May 31, 1985: Pedro Muñoz was signed by the Blue Jays as an amateur free agent.
June 3, 1985: 1985 Major League Baseball draft
The Blue Jays drafted outfielder Greg David with the twenty-fifth overall pick in the 1985 Draft.
Jim Abbott was drafted by the Blue Jays in the 36th round, but did not sign.
Todd Stottlemyre was drafted by the Blue Jays in the 1st round (3rd pick) of the (Secondary Phase). Player signed August 12, 1985.
June 22, 1985: Mitch Webster was traded by the Blue Jays to the Montreal Expos for a player to be named later. The Expos completed the deal by sending Cliff Young to the Blue Jays on September 10.
July 9, 1985: Len Matuszek was traded by the Blue Jays to the Los Angeles Dodgers for Al Oliver.
August 28, 1985: The Blue Jays traded players to be named later to the Texas Rangers for Cliff Johnson. The Blue Jays completed the deal by sending Matt Williams and Jeff Mays (minors) to the Rangers on August 29, and Greg Ferlenda (minors) to the Rangers on November 14.
September 15, 1985: Junior Félix was signed by the Blue Jays as a free agent.
September 17, 1985: Francisco Cabrera was signed by the Blue Jays as an amateur free agent.Note: Pos = Position; G = Games played; AB = At bats; H = Hits; Avg. = Batting average; HR = Home runs; RBI = Runs batted in




= Indicates team leader
Note: G = Games played; AB = At bats; H = Hits; Avg. = Batting average; HR = Home runs; RBI = Runs batted in
Note: G = Games pitched; IP = Innings pitched; W = Wins; L = Losses; ERA = Earned run average; SO = Strikeouts
Note: G = Games pitched; IP = Innings pitched; W = Wins; L = Losses; ERA = Earned run average; SO = Strikeouts
Note: G = Games pitched; IP = Innings pitched; W = Wins; L = Losses; SV = Saves; ERA = Earned run average; SO = Strikeouts
October 8, Exhibition Stadium
October 9, Exhibition Stadium
October 11, Royals Stadium
October 12, Royals Stadium
October 13, Royals Stadium
October 15, Exhibition Stadium
October 16, Exhibition Stadium
Jesse Barfield, American League Leader in Outfield Assists (22)
George Bell, Silver Slugger Award
Bobby Cox, American League Manager of the Year Award
Bobby Cox, The Sporting News Manager of the Year Award
Dave Stieb, Pitcher of the Month Award, May
Dave Stieb, American League ERA Champion, 2.48All-Star Game
Dámaso García, Second Base
Jimmy Key, Pitcher
Dave Stieb, Pitcher
Ernie Whitt, CatcherLEAGUE CHAMPIONS: Florence
1985 Toronto Blue Jays at Baseball Reference
1985 Toronto Blue Jays at Baseball Almanac