The International Orienteering Federation (IOF) is the international governing body of the sport of orienteering.  The IOF head office is located in Karlstad, Sweden. The IOF governs four orienteering disciplines: foot orienteering, mountain bike orienteering, ski orienteering, and trail orienteering.
After the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the International Orienteering Federation suspended the membership of the Russian Orienteering Federation. The IOF also disallowed Russian orienteering athletes from participating in IOF events, even as neutral athletes, cancelled all organising rights for IOF events and activities in Russia, and suspended all Russian members appointed to IOF official bodies.
The IOF was founded on 21 May 1961 at a Congress held in Copenhagen, Denmark by the orienteering national federations of Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, the German Democratic Republic, Finland, Hungary, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland. By 1969, the IOF represented 16 countries, including its first two non-European member federations representing Japan and Canada, and in 1977 the IOF was recognised by the International Olympic Committee.
After the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the International Orienteering Federation suspended the membership of the Russian Orienteering Federation. The IOF also disallowed Russian orienteering athletes from participating in IOF events, even as neutral athletes, cancelled all organising rights for IOF events and activities in Russia, and suspended all Russian members appointed to IOF official bodies.
As of January 2016, the membership of the IOF comprised 80 national orienteering federations, of which 56 were members, 24 were provisional members, divided into six geographical regions.
6 Members, 1 Provisional Member



 Cameroon
 Egypt
 Kenya
 Mozambique


 Somalia
 South Africa
 Uganda
17 Members, 1 Provisional Member



 China
 Chinese Taipei
 Hong Kong
 India


 Indonesia
 Iran
 Japan
 Kazakhstan


 Kyrgyzstan
 Malaysia
 Macau
 Nepal


 North Korea
 Philippines
 South Korea


 Singapore
 Thailand
40 Members



 Austria
 Azerbaijan
 Belgium
 Belarus
 Bulgaria
 Croatia
 Cyprus
 Czech Republic


 Denmark
 Estonia
 Finland
 France
 Georgia
 Germany
 Great Britain
 Greece


 Hungary
 Ireland
 Israel
 Italy
 Latvia
 Liechtenstein
 Lithuania
 Macedonia


 Moldova
 Montenegro
 Netherlands
 Norway
 Poland
 Portugal
 Romania
 Russia (suspended)


 Serbia
 Slovakia
 Slovenia
 Spain
 Sweden
 Switzerland
 Turkey
 Ukraine
5 Members



 Barbados
 Canada
 Jamaica


 Puerto Rico
 United States
2 Members



 Australia


 New Zealand
9 Members



 Argentina
 Brazil
 Chile


 Colombia
 Cuba
 Ecuador


 Panama
 Uruguay
 Venezuela
The IOF is governed by an elected Council consisting of a President, a Senior Vice President, two Vice Presidents, and seven other Council members.  Day-to-day operations of the IOF are the responsibility of the IOF Secretary General.  Several standing commissions of the IOF are responsible for the development of the sport worldwide.  These commissions include: Foot Orienteering, MTB Orienteering, Ski Orienteering, Trail Orienteering, Environment, IT, Map, Medical, and Rules.
Erik Tobé (1961—1975)
Lasse Heideman (1975—1982)
Bengt Saltin (1982—1988)
Heinz Tschudin (1988—1994)
Sue Harvey (1994—2004)
Åke Jacobson (2004—2012)
Brian Porteous (2012—2016)
Leho Haldna (2016—)Since 1977, the IOF has been recognised by the International Olympic Committee.
The IOF is also a member of the following organisations:
Association of IOC Recognised International Sports Federations (ARISF)
International World Games Association (IWGA)
International Masters Games Association (IMGA)
SportAccordThe IOF publishes a wide variety of journals and reference works related to the sport.  These include Orienteering World, an annual magazine, The Scientific Journal of Orienteering, the OZine, and official editions of the rules of IOF sanctioned orienteering and specifications for orienteering maps.
