Roll Call is a newspaper and website published in Washington, D.C., United States, when the United States Congress is in session, reporting news of legislative and political maneuverings on Capitol Hill, as well as political coverage of congressional elections across the country.
Roll Call is the flagship publication of CQ Roll Call, which also operates: CQ (formerly Congressional Quarterly), publisher of a subscriber-based service for daily and weekly news about Congress and politics, as well as a weekly magazine. Roll Call's regular columnists are Walter Shapiro, Mary C. Curtis, Patricia Murphy, and Stu Rothenberger.
Roll Call was founded in 1955 by Sid Yudain, a press secretary to Congressman Al Morano (R-Conn.).  The inaugural issue of the newspaper was published on June 16, 1955, with an initial printing of 10,000 copies. Richard Nixon, then Vice President of the United States, wrote a letter to Yudain congratulating him on the new venture. Nixon's letter ran on the front page of the inaugural issue.
In 1986, Yudain sold Roll Call to Arthur Levitt, who was serving as the chairman of the American Stock Exchange at the time of the sale. Yudain continued to work as a columnist at Roll Call after the sale.
The Economist Group acquired Roll Call in 1993. Roll Call merged with CQ in 2009 after the latter company was purchased by The Economist Group.
In July 2018, a deal was announced for CQ Roll Call to be acquired by FiscalNote.
In January 1988, Roll Call launched the "Heard on the Hill" column, which covers the intrigue of life and work in and around Capitol Hill. Alex Gangitano wrote Heard on the Hill from 2014 to 2018 before leaving to cover lobbying for The Hill. On 30 April 2019, Roll Call announced the current Heard on the Hill writing team of Clyde McGrady and Kathryn Lyons.
In 1962, Roll Call began sponsoring the annual Congressional Baseball Game for Charity. In 1965, the first Roll Call Trophy was awarded—to the Republican team, which was the first team to win three games since Roll Call began its sponsorship. Since then, a new trophy has been awarded to the next team that wins three games (over the next three, four, or five years), following the year in which the most recent trophy was awarded. Roll Call also sponsors the Congressional Baseball Hall of Fame.
Kathryn Lyons, Heard on the Hill reporter
Camila Dechalus, Immigration Reporter
Kathryn Tully McManus, Congressional Reporter
Rebecca Adams, Senior Editor
Megan Scully, Senior Editor
Ed Timms, Investigations Editor
Herb Jackson, Politics Editor
Jason Dick, Deputy Editor
Lindsey Gilbert, Deputy Editor
Lindsey McPherson, Senior Writer
Niels Lesniewski, Senior Writer
John M. Donnelly, Senior Writer
Jennifer Shutt, Budget and Appropriations Reporter
Bridget Bowman, Politics Reporter
Simone Pathé, Politics Reporter
Stephanie Akin, Politics Reporter
Kate Ackley, Lobbying ReporterMary Ann Akers, staff writer for Politico
Christina Bellantoni, assistant managing editor for politics for Los Angeles Times
Chris Cillizza, politics reporter and editor-at-large for CNN
Tim Curran, Sunday Editor for The Washington Post
Steven T. Dennis, Senate reporter for Bloomberg
Matt Fuller, politics editor for The Daily Beast
Emily Heil, co-author the Reliable Source, The Washington Post
Ed Henry, chief national correspondent for Fox News Channel
Paul Kane, senior congressional correspondent for The Washington Post
Pablo Manriquez, publicist at Center for Investigative Reporting
Steve Kornacki, national political correspondent for NBC News and MSNBC
John McArdle, producer and co-host for C-SPAN's Washington Journal
Norah O'Donnell, co-anchor for CBS This Morning
Ben Pershing, Managing Editor for National Journal
Mark Preston, executive editor for CNN Politics
Glenn R. Simpson, Founder of Fusion GPS
Jake Tapper, anchor for CNN's The Lead with Jake Tapper and State of the Union
Nina Totenberg, correspondent for National Public Radio
Jim VandeHei, co-founder and CEO of Axios; former executive editor and co-founder of Politico
Rachel Van Dongen, editor of PowerPost for The Washington PostPolitical Theater Podcast is a Roll Call podcast hosted by Jason Dick.
List of newspapers in Washington, D.C.Official website