A cable ferry (including the terms chain ferry, swing ferry, floating bridge, or punt) is a ferry that is guided (and in many cases propelled) across a river or large body of water by cables connected to both shores. Early cable ferries often used either rope or steel chains, with the latter resulting in the alternative name of chain ferry. Both of these were largely replaced by wire cable by the late 19th century.
There are three types of cable ferry: the reaction ferry, which uses the power of the river to tack across the current; the powered cable ferry, which uses an engine or electric motors (e.g., the Canby Ferry in the U.S. State of Oregon) to wind itself across; and the fast-disappearing hand-operated type, such as the Stratford-upon-Avon chain ferry in the UK and the Saugatuck Chain Ferry in Saugatuck, Michigan, United States.
Powered cable ferries use powered cogs or drums on board the vessel to pull itself along by the cables. The cables or chains have a considerable amount of slack built into them, in order to sink below the surface as the ferry moves away, allowing other vessels to pass without becoming grounded, snared or trapped. Where a ferry carries both passengers and vehicles the car deck occupies the centre (helping to balance the vessel) and two passenger areas are at the sides, over the tunnels for the chains and the engines. As the ferry cannot steer, a ramp is built at both ends and there is usually a set of controls facing in either direction.
Cable ferries are common where there is little other water-borne traffic that could get snagged in the cable or chains, where the water may be too shallow for other options, or where the river current is too strong to permit the safe crossing of a ferry not attached to the shore. Alignment of the platform at each end of the journey is automatic and, especially for vehicle ferries, safer than a free-moving ferry might be in bad conditions.
A special type are electrically powered overhead-wire ferries like Straussee Ferry, which have an onboard propulsion unit and can float free, but are connected to the overhead wire for power supply, using an electrical cable that slides along the wire as the ferry moves.
Duplicated punts can be provided if capacity of one is not enough. Twin ferries allow one to operate while the other is being maintained.
Cable ferries have probably been used to cross rivers and similar bodies of water since before recorded history. Examples of ferry routes using this technology date back to the 13th century (Hampton Ferry in England).
In the early 1900s a cable ferry designed by Canadian engineer William Pitt was installed on the Kennebecasis River near Saint John, New Brunswick in Canada. There are now eight cable ferries along the Saint John River system in southern New Brunswick. In Canada a cable ferry is proposed to transport automobiles across the Ottawa River in Ontario. There are several in British Columbia: two on the Fraser, one at Lytton, one at Big Bar, three on Arrow Lakes. A suspended cable ferry worked until the 1980s in Boston Bar. A small seasonal reaction ferry carries cars across the Rivière des Prairies from Laval, Quebec (Sainte-Dorothée neighbourhood) to Île Bizard (part of Montreal).
Cable ferries were particularly prominent in early transportation in the Sacramento Delta of California. Dozens of cable ferries operated on the Columbia River in the US northwest, and most have been rendered obsolete by bridges. A suspended cable ferry for railway cars crossed the American River in Northern California.
Most of the road crossings of the Murray River in South Australia are cable ferries operated by the state government using diesel engines. The platforms at the ends can be moved up or down according to the water level. At one time, cable ferries were a primary means of automobile transportation in New South Wales in Australia. In Tasmania, for a century before 1934, the Risdon Punt at Hobart was the only fixed method of crossing the Derwent River within Hobart city limits.
In the fishing village of Tai O on Lantau Island, Hong Kong, the Tai O Ferry (橫水渡) crossed the Tai O River before a bascule bridge was built.
The largest and busiest cable ferry is the Torpoint Ferry in Plymouth, England. It was first converted to cable operation in 1831 and currently operates 3 ferries, carrying 8000 vehicles per day. 
The earliest punts were privately owned by local landowners, and charged a toll. As governments started to build roads, they started to build and operate punts as required. Private punts might be bought out, or made to impose more standard tolls.
Current cable ferry routes include:
Butrint Ferry, across the Vivari Channel near ButrintRollfähre Klosterneuburg, across the Danube River at Klosterneuburg
Drahtseilbrücke Ottensheim, across the Danube River at OttensheimXunantunich Ferry, across the Mopan River at XunantunichBalseo de San Javier, across San Pedro River, Los Ríos Region. Medsave cable ferryMedsave Ferry, across the Sava River (Medsave–Zaprešić) in Zagreb County, overhead cable
Otočanka Ferry, across the Sava River (Otok Samoborski–Savski Marof) in Zagreb County, overhead cable
Oborovo, across the Sava River (Oborovo–Vrbovo Posavsko) in Zagreb County, overhead cable
Martinska ves, across the Sava River (Dubrovčak Lijevi–Dubrovčak Desni) in Sisak-Moslavina County, overhead cable
Tišina, across the Sava River (Tišina Kaptolska–Tišina Erdedska) in Sisak-Moslavina County, overhead cable
Sunjanka, across the Sava River (Graduša Posavska–Lukavec Posavski) in Sisak-Moslavina County, overhead cable
Kratečko, across the Sava River (Kratečko–Sunjsko Selište) in Sisak-Moslavina County, overhead cable
Pitomača Jelkuš Ferry, across the Drava River, in Virovitica–Podravina County
Pitomača Križnica, across the Drava River, in Virovitica–Podravina County
Osijek Zoološki vrt, across the Drava River, Osijek-Baranja CountyDolní Žleb Ferry, reactive ferry across the Elbe at Dolní Žleb near Děčín, lower cable
Vrané nad Vltavou – Strnady, reactive ferry across the Vltava before Prague, with overhead cable
Klecánky – Roztoky ferry over the Vltava under Prague, secured by overhead cable
Máslovice, Dol - Libčice ferry over the Vltava under Prague, secured by lower cable
Lužec nad Vltavou ferry over the Vltava, secured by overhead cable
Zlenice - Senohraby swimpool, ferry over the Sázava river, overhead security cable installed but usually unused
Oseček ferry, Elbe river, formerly secured by overhead cable, now without it
Kazín ferry, Berounka river, 1992–2007 propelled through lower chain, since 2015 unsecured boat
Nadryby ferry, Berounka river, secured by the overhead cable
Darová ferry, Berounka river, propelled through the overhead cableØstre Ferry, across Isefjord between Hammer Bakke and Orø. Uses cables for steering, but propellers for propulsion.
Udbyhøj Ferry, across Randers Fjord.Kavastu Ferry, across Emajõgi in Kavastu (manual mechanism, more than century old flywheel)Björkölinjen, across Björkösund strait between the islands of Korsö (in Kumlinge municipality) and Bockholm (in Brändö m.)
Embarsundlinjen, across Embarsund strait in Föglö municipality, between the islands of Finholma and Jyddö
Töftölinjen, across Prästösund strait between the islands of Töftö (in Vårdö municipality) and Prästö (in Sund m.)
Seglingelinjen, across the strait between the islands of Seglinge and Snäckö (both in Seglinge village in Kumlinge municipality)
Simskälalinjen, across the strait between the islands of Alören and Östra Simskäla (both in Vårdö municipality)
Ängsösundlinjen, across Ängösund strait between the islands of Lumparland (in Lumparland municipality) and Ängö (in Vårdö m.)Bac du Sauvage Ferry, across a branch of the Rhône in the CamargueBansang Ferry, across the River Gambia at Bansang in the Central River DivisionNam Sang Wai Ferry, at Nam Sang Wai in northwestern New TerritoriesOne cable ferry across the Danube between Csepel and Soroksár, in Budapest
A cable ferry crosses the Tisza between Tiszalök and TiszatardosA cable ferry serves Little Island and Waterford Castle in the River SuirTwo cable ferries across the port of Cesenatico, in Romagna
One cable ferry across the port of Bellaria-Igea Marina, in Romagna
An engineless cable ferry (Traghetto di Leonardo) between Imbersago (Lecco) e Villa d'Adda (Bergamo), in Lombardia, in the Ecomuseo Adda di Leonardo da Vinci river museum
Another "Traghetto di Leonardo" across the Tevere river, in Lazio, in the Riserva Naturale di Nazzano natural reserveFerry across Shire River, 37 km south of Malawi's southernmost borderThere are more than 100 cable ferries in the Netherlands, 11 of which use a floating cable with a single anchorage. The larger ones are usually powered by a diesel-powered screw propeller, the smaller ones often use the cable for propulsion. Most of the larger cable ferries angle themselves in the stream to gain part of their propulsion from the current, as a reaction ferry.
Some examples:
Cuijk ferry, across the Meuse at Cuijk
Genemuiden ferry, across the Zwarte Water at Genemuiden
Jonen ferry, across the Walengracht at Jonen, only taking foot passengers and cyclists, winched to the other bank by an electric motor on one of the banks.
Lexkesveer, across the Nederrijn near Wageningen, first mentioned in 1426
Oijen Ferry, across the Meuse at Oijen
Wijhe Ferry, across the IJssel at Wijhe
Wijk bij Duurstede ferry, across the Lek. This one uses a floating cable.Tuapeka Mouth Ferry, in Tuapeka – South Island, on the Clutha RiverFjone ferry, across lake Nisser in Nissedal, Telemark
Espevær Ferry, in Bømlo, Hordaland
Duesund–Masfjordnes, in Nordhordland
Mjånes-Hisarøy, in Gulen, Sogn og FjordanePerec Ferry, across the Perec distributary of the river Hron, between Starý Tekov and Nový Tekov in Levice district - Foot ferry, came into use in the late 18th century and ceased operations in 2014, replaced by a bridge.Malgas Ferry, across the Breede River at Malgas, Western CapeAbai village ferry in SokchoPas de barca de Flix, across the Ebro river, in Flix, Catalonia
Pas de barca de Miravet, across the Ebro river, in Miravet, CataloniaBasel Ferries [de], four routes across the Rhine in the city of Basel
Ellikon–Nack Ferry [de], across the Rhine from Marthalen to Lottstetten in Germany
Fahr Abbey Ferry [de], across the Limmat river at Fahr AbbeyChambeshi Ferry, across the Chambeshi River near Mbesuma
Kabompo Ferry, across the Kabompo River 80 km south-east of Kabompo
Kafue Ferry, across the Kafue River 4.5 km west of the ZambeziEkusileni Ferry, across the Insiza River downstream of Filabusi Media related to Cable ferries at Wikimedia Commons
Twyford chain ferry on the River Trent, UK, 1899
Cable ferries operating in New Brunswick, Canada
