The CONMEBOL qualifiers for the FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup (natively in Spanish: Eliminatorias CONMEBOL al Mundial de la FIFA de Fútbol Playa), also previously known as the South American Beach Soccer Championship (Spanish: Sudamericano de Fútbol Playa), is the main championship for beach soccer in South America, contested between the senior men's national teams of the members of CONMEBOL.
The tournament acts as the qualification route for South American nations to the FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup. The winners of the championship are also crowned continental champions. Coinciding with the annual staging of the World Cup, the competition took place yearly until 2009; the World Cup then became biennial, and as its supplementary qualification event, the championship followed suit.
The championship was established in 2006 after FIFA made it a requirement for all confederations to begin holding qualification tournaments to determine the best national team(s) in their region and hence those who would proceed to represent their continent in the upcoming World Cup (previously, nations were simply invited to play without having to earn their place). The first edition was proceeded by a joint qualification tournament with CONMEBOL in 2005; a second and final joint event was held in 2007. FIFA currently allocate South America three berths at the World Cup and hence the top three teams (the winners, runners-up and third place play-off winner) qualify to the World Cup finals.
Beach Soccer Worldwide (BSWW) originally organised the competition under the title FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup CONMEBOL qualifier. In 2013, CONMEBOL began reporting on the event using the aforementioned Sudamericano title (which the tournament became informally known as) before taking organisational control under a new title in 2017.
Since 2016, the Copa América has also been staged by CONMEBOL; however it is not used a qualification tournament to the World Cup.
Brazil are current champions and the most successful nation with eight titles. They also won the 2005 joint event.
  Joint championship with CONCACAFFor every edition, the top three nations qualified to the FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup.
As of 2021

Joint event results not included

Key:
Appearances App / Won in normal time W = 3 points / Won in extra-time W+ = 2 points / Won on penalty shoot-out WP = 1 point / Lost L = 0 points / Points per game PPG
The following is a performance timeline of the teams who have appeared in the CONMEBOL qualifiers and how many appearances they each have made.
Legend



1st – Champions
2nd – Runners-up
3rd – Third place
4th – Fourth place
5th–10th – Fifth to tenth place


× − Did not enter
•• – Entered but withdrew
    – Hosts
Apps – No. of appearances


TimelineThe following is a performance timeline of the CONMEBOL teams who have gone on to appear in the World Cup, having successfully qualified from the above events.
Legend



1st – Champions
2nd – Runners-up
3rd – Third place
4th – Fourth place
   – Hosts (qualify automatically)


QF – Quarter-finals
R1 – Round 1 (group stage)
q – Qualified for upcoming tournament
Total – Total times qualified for World Cup


TimelineCopa América de Beach Soccer
FIFA Futsal World Cup qualification (CONMEBOL)CONMEBOL, official website
Beach Soccer Worldwide, official website