


This is a list of regions of Australia that are not Australian states or territories. The most commonly known regionalisation is the governmental division of the state into regions for economic development purposes.
Others regionalisations include those made for purposes of land management, such as agriculture or conservation; information gathering, such as statistical or meteorological. Although most regionalisations were defined for specific purposes and give specific boundaries, many regions will have similar names and extents across different regionalisations. As a result, the names and boundaries of regions can vary and may overlap in popular places.
Not all the regions in this list have official status as an economic or administrative region.
A regionalisation of Australia is a system by which Australia is divided into regions. There are a great many different regionalisations, created for a range of purposes, including political, administrative, statistical and biological.
The most prominent regionalisation of Australia is the division into the various states and territories. For electoral purposes, the Australian Senate uses states and territories, but the Australian House of Representatives breaks the country into Divisions. Each state is similarly divided into electoral "regions", "districts" or "provinces", each of which elects members to the house or houses of the state's parliament. Finally, the country is divided into local government areas, each of which is administered by a council.
Other administrative regionalisations may exist within each state. For example, the whole of mainland Western Australia other than the Perth metropolitan area, is divided into regions for the purposes of administration of the Regional Development Commissions Act 1993.
For the purposes of statistical geography, the Australian Bureau of Statistics uses the Australian Standard Geographical Classification, a hierarchical regionalisation whose coarsest level is the states and territories, then statistical divisions, statistical subdivisions, statistical local areas, and finally, census collection districts.
Until recently, most biogeographical and phytogeographical regionalisations of Australia were individually defined for each state and territories; for example: Gwen Harden's botanical regionalisation of New South Wales; Orchard's "natural regions" regionalisation of Tasmania; and John Stanley Beard's division of Western Australia into Botanical Provinces and Botanical Districts.
More recently, two regionalisations that cover the entire country have been put in place. The World Wildlife Fund's regionalisation of the world into 825 terrestrial ecoregions created 40 ecoregions in Australia. Within Australia, however, the de facto standard regionalisation is now the Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia (IBRA). This divides Australia into 85 bioregions, which are further divided into 404 subregions.
There are a range of other regionalisations of Australia, including:
meteorological and climatic regionalisations, as defined and used by the Bureau of Meteorology;
catchment areas and drainage systems;
geological regionalisationcadastral divisions of AustraliaCapital Country – ACT/NSW
Eastern Australia – NSW/QLD/VIC/ACT, sometimes including SA and TAS
East Coast of Australia – also known as an Eastern seaboard
Lake Eyre basin – QLD/SA/NT/NSW
Murray–Darling basin – NSW/ACT/VIC/QLD/SA
Northern Australia – NT/QLD/part of WA
The Nullarbor – SA/WA
Outback – mainly NT and WA, but all territories except ACT and TAS
Southern Australia – TAS/VIC/SA, sometimes including NSW and WA
Sunraysia – a portion of NSW and VICSee also the Bureau of Meteorology's NSW regions map.
Blue Mountains
Central Coast
Central Tablelands
Central West
Greater Western Sydney
Far South Coast
Far West
Hunter Region (Newcastle)
Illawarra (Wollongong)
Lord Howe Island
New England (north-west)
Murray
Mid North Coast
North West Slopes
Northern Rivers
Northern Tablelands
Orana
Riverina
Sapphire Coast
Snowy Mountains
South Coast
Southern Highlands
Southern Tablelands
South West Slopes
Sunraysia
SydneySee also the Bureau of Meteorology's NT region map
Arnhem Land
Barkly Tableland
Central Australia/Alice Springs Region/Red Centre
Darwin Region
Katherine Region
Top End
Victoria RiverSee also the Bureau of Meteorology's Queensland region map
Central Queensland
Channel Country
Capricorn Coast
Darling Downs
Granite Belt
Maranoa
Far North Queensland
Torres Strait Islands
Gulf Country
North Queensland
Whitsunday
Townsville
South East Queensland
Brisbane
Gold Coast
Sunshine Coast
West Moreton
Wide Bay-Burnett
South Burnett
Central West Queensland
South West Queensland
Channel CountrySee also the Bureau of Meteorology's South Australia regions map
Adelaide Plains
Adelaide Hills/Mount Lofty Ranges
Barossa Valley
Eyre Peninsula
Far North
Fleurieu Peninsula
Flinders Ranges
Kangaroo Island
Limestone Coast
Mid North
Clare Valley
Murray Mallee
Murraylands
Riverland
Yorke Peninsula
Copper TriangleSee also the Bureau of Meteorology's Tasmania regions map
Central Highlands
Midlands
West Coast
HobartSee also the Bureau of Meteorology's Victoria regions map
Official
The six official regions of Victoria are:
Barwon South West
Gippsland
Grampians
Greater Melbourne
Hume
Loddon MalleeUnofficial
Central Victoria
Yarra Valley
Upper Yarra
The Bays
Port Phillip
Mornington Peninsula
Bellarine Peninsula
Western Port
Goldfields
Spa Country
Central Coast
Bass Coast
Northern Country/North Central
Central Murray
Lower Goulburn
Goulburn Valley
Southern Riverina
Upper Goulburn
Northeast
Victorian Alps
Upper Murray
High Country
Bogong High Plains
Gippsland
East Gippsland
West Gippsland
South Gippsland
Central Gippsland
Gippsland Lakes
Central Gippsland Coast
East Gippsland Coast
Victorian Alps
Western District
Central Highlands/Tablelands
Pyrenees
The Grampians
Goldfields
Spa Country
Southwest
The Otways
West Coast
Shipwreck Coast
Great Ocean Road
Surf Coast
Northwest
The Mallee
Sunraysia
Millewa
The WimmeraSee also the Bureau of Meteorology's Western Australia regions map.
The Western Australian system of regions defined by the Government of Western Australia for purposes of economic development administration, which excludes the Perth metropolitan area, is a series of nine regions.
The nine defined regions are:
Gascoyne
Goldfields-Esperance
Great Southern
Kimberley
Mid West
Peel
Pilbara
South West
WheatbeltAustralian regional rivalries
Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia
Local government in AustraliaMyRegion.gov.au – an Australian government website dedicated to providing information about the 55 regions of the nation
RDA.gov.au – Regional Development Australia sets regional priorities and helps guide local development and policy