Emagic was a music software and hardware company based in Rellingen, Germany and a satellite office in Grass Valley, California.  On July 1, 2002 Emagic was bought by Apple Computer. Emagic's Windows-based product offerings were discontinued on September 30, 2002.
The company was best known for its music sequencer, Logic. Logic stemmed from Creator, then Notator, made by C-Lab (the company's forerunner) for the Atari ST platform. In 1992, Emagic Soft- und Hardware GmbH was founded and Notator Logic was launched for Atari and Macintosh, followed by a version for Windows. The "Notator" was dropped from the name and the product was redesigned from the ground up, and the product became known under the name "Emagic Logic". Original copies of Emagic's Logic software retailed for US$699 (equivalent to $1,350 in 2021) and its plugins were $99–$299 apiece before Apple bundled them all together. When Apple bought Emagic, Logic had "Emagic" dropped from the title, and is now called Logic Pro. As a result of the purchase by Apple, the Windows version was discontinued.
The other major software product that Emagic offered was SoundDiver, an editor/librarian for hardware synthesizers. It communicated via MIDI and offered easy patch and sound management. While there was a beta version for Mac OS X, production of SoundDiver was discontinued in 2005.
Emagic formerly offered a line of audio interface hardware, the Audiowerk PCI cards, as well as USB units. A potential post-acquisition successor to these products, the unreleased Asteroid FireWire interface, was the subject of the Apple v. Does trade secret litigation.
SuperTrack (for Commodore 64) - MIDI sequencer
ScoreTrack - scorewriting
Creator (for Atari ST) - MIDI sequencer
Notator (for Atari ST) - MIDI sequencer and scorewriter
Notator Alpha (for Atari ST) - cut-down educational version of Notator
Aura (for Atari ST) - ear training
Explorer 1000 - patch editor
Explorer 32 - patch editor
Explorer M1 - patch editor
Midia - MIDI monitor/educational tool
Polyframe - patch editor
SoftLink
Xalyser (for Atari ST) FM synthesizerUnitor (for Atari) - SMPTE/EBU synchroniser
Unitor 2 (for Atari) - SMPTE synchroniser/MIDI interface
Combiner (for Atari) - cartridge expansion interface
Export (for Atari) - MIDI interface
Falcon mk I, mk II and mk X
Steady Eye - SMPTE/VITC synchroniser
Human Touch - Audio synchroniserLogic
MicroLogic
Sound Diver
Waveburner
Epic TDM
Guitar Tuner
Space Designer
HearMaster - music theory training
ZAP - audio file compressionES1 synthesizer
ES2 synthesizer
EVP73 Fender Rhodes VST instrument
EVP88 electric piano
EXS24 sampler
EXSP24 sample player
EVB3 Hammond B3 instrument
EVD6 Hohner Clavinet instrument
EVOC20 vocoderLOG3 (for Atari ST) - MIDI interface
LOG2mac - MIDI interface
LOG2PC (c.1991) - ISA 1×1 MIDI interface card (rebranded Midiman MM-401 card)
Audiowerk II - PCI soundcard
Audiowerk8 - PCI soundcard
Unitor 8 - 1U rackmount 8×8 MIDI interface
AMT8 - 1U rackmount 8×8 MIDI interface
MT4 - 2×4 MIDI interface
EMI 6|2m - USB audio interface
EMI 2|6 - USB audio interface
Logic Control"Multitracking On A Budget". Electronics & Music Maker. June 1986. pp. 66–8. OCLC 317187644.Official site (archive.org)