LUT University (English: Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT) (Finnish: Lappeenrannan-Lahden Teknillinen Yliopisto LUT) is a public research university which was established in 1969. The university's Lappeenranta campus is situated on the shore of lake Saimaa – the 4th largest lake in Europe. LUT University's second campus is in Finnish city of Lahti. LUT University also has research units in the Finnish cities of Mikkeli and Kouvola.
LUT University is the only Finnish University of Technology, in that is specializes its academics and research on the fields of engineering and technology. LUT University also has a school of business. LUT University specializes on renewable technology, combatting climate change, and finding sustainable engineering solutions. 
LUT University has been ranked in the top 5 Finnish Universities in the 2023 QS Top 500 Universities list, and is in the top 3% of Universities globally. LUT has steadily risen in global and domestic prestige, being ranked in the world's 20 most rapidly developing challenger universities. LUT was also ranked the 9th best University on the globe for climate action.
There are 1,089 staff members and 6,331 students in the university. LUT awards the following degrees: Bachelor of Science (Econ), Bachelor of Science (Tech), Master of Science (Tech), Master of Science (Econ), Licentiate of Science (Econ), Licentiate of Science (Tech), Doctor of Science (Tech), Doctor of Science (Econ), and Doctor of Philosophy.
LUT University has internationally accredited Master's programmes. Master's degree programme in International Marketing Management was awarded EFMD's EPAS-accreditation. EUR-ACE and ASIIN-accredited programmes LUT University has are in Chemical Engineering, Energy Technology, Environmental Technology, Mechanical Engineering, Electrical Engineering and in Industrial Management. 
LUT University is ran and funded by the Finnish government. LUT University is apart of the LUT-Universities Group. The group also runs the LAB University of Applied Sciences which shares a campus with LUT University. LUT University focuses on academic, theoretical, highly technical, and research oriented subjects, while LAB University of Applied Sciences focuses on practical and career-oriented teaching. 
Combining technology and business, LUT University (in Finnish: until 2003 Lappeenrannan teknillinen korkeakoulu, LTKK, and from 2003 Lappeenrannan-Lahden teknillinen yliopisto, LTY) has served as an academic forerunner since 1969. In the 1950s and 1960s, the Finnish government made plans to establish the University of Eastern Finland in Lappeenranta, but it was ultimately decentralized in three cities: Lappeenranta, Kuopio, and Joensuu. Only the departments of engineering were located in Lappeenranta at that time. In 1991, the department of Business Administration was also added to the Lappeenranta Campus.
The Kuopio and Joensuu campuses were combined into the University of Eastern Finland in 2010, while LUT University kept its Lappeenranta campus as well as its previously added operations in Lahti and the Lahti campus.
LUT University started permanent operations Lahti in 1996. After LUT University's second campus opened, the university re-branded from Lappeenranta University of Technology to Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology, keeping the LUT abbreviation. 
Chairman Tuomo Rönkkö, CEO of Maintpartner Group
Vice-chairman Teresa Kemppi-Vasama, Chairman of Kemppi Oy
Kimmo Rauma, Vice President, Danfoss Power Solutions, Electrics
Ilkka Salonen, CEO East Office of Finnish Industries Oy
Liisa Rohweder, Secretary General, WWF Finland
Aki Mikkola, Professor, LUT
Mari Kallioinen, Associate Professor, LUT
Paavo Ritala, Professor, LUT
Henri Antikainen, Business student, LUTRector D.Sc. (B.A.) Juha-Matti Saksa
Vice Rector (Research) Jari Hämäläinen, PhD, Professor
Vice Rector (Education) Jaana Sandström D.Sc. (Tech.), ProfessorLUT University is called Finland's International University due to the high amount of international programs and students that are attending the university. Over 10% of LUT University's student population is international and the school has a representation of 94 different nationalities
Over 92% of international students were happy with their experience studying at LUT University. Lappeenranta, the city of LUT University's main campus, is also known as a welcoming international city.
LUT offers six different international Bachelor's programmes in English:
Electrical Engineering* (Lappeenranta Campus)
Mechanical Engineering* (Lappeenranta Campus)
Technology and Engineering Science (Lappeenranta Campus)
Energy Technology* (Lahti Campus)
Industrial Engineering and Management (Lahti Campus)
Software Systems and Engineering* (Lahti Campus)Bachelor's programmes marked with a * are double degree programmes, where the student will receive a diploma from LUT University, as well as LUT University's partner university, Heibei University of Technology in China.
As of 2022, LUT University does not offer international bachelor's programs in Business and Economics.
LUT also offers 26 Master's level international programmes in English.
Biorefineries (Lappeenranta Campus)
Chemical Engineering (Lappeenranta Campus)
Water Technology (Mikkeli Research Unit)
Sustainable Biomass and Bioproduct Engineering (Lappeenranta Campus)
Business analytics, Engineering Science (Lappeenranta Campus)
Data-Centric Engineering (Lappeenranta Campus)
Technical Physics (Lappeenranta Campus)
Electric Transportation Systems (Lahti Campus)
Electrical Engineering (Lappeenranta Campus)
Sustainable Energy Systems (Lappeenranta Campus)
Energy Conversion (Lappeenranta Campus)
Nuclear Engineering (Lappeenranta Campus)
Sustainability Science and Solutions (Lappeenranta Campus)
Circular Economy (Lahti campus)
Global Management of Innovation and Technology (Lappeenranta Campus)
Innovation and Logistics (Kouvola Research Unit)
Industrial Design Engineering (Lahti Campus)
Materials Science and Technology (Lappeenranta Campus)
Mechanical Engineering (Lappeenranta Campus)
Digital Systems and Service Development (Lahti Campus)
Software Engineering and Digital Transformation (Lappeenranta Campus)
Software Product Management and Business (Lahti campus)
Sustainable ICT Solutions of Tomorrow (Lappeenranta Campus)
Software Engineers for Green Deal (Lappeenranta Campus)International Business and Entrepreneurship (Lappeenranta Campus)
Business Analytics (Lappeenranta Campus)
International Marketing and Management (Lappeenranta Campus)
Strategic Finance and Analytics (Lappeenranta Campus)
Supply Management (Lappeenranta Campus)At the beginning of 2015, the university shifted to an organization model which does not have traditional faculties and departments. Instead, the university consists of three distinct schools which focus on the following research topics:
Energy Technology
Electrical Engineering
Sustainability Science
Mechanical Engineering
Technology and Engineering ScienceChemical Engineering
Computational Engineering and Physics
Industrial Engineering and Management
Software Engineering and Digital TransformationStrategy, Management and Accounting
International Business, Marketing and Entrepreneurship
Business Analytics and Data ScienceCentre for Separation Technology (CST)
Carelian Drives and Motor Centre (CDMC)
Centre of Computational Engineering and Integrated Design (CEID)The Viipuri Prize, established by the Society for Viipuri School of Economics, is awarded for outstanding achievements in the field of strategy research. The Prize is given every second year to a scholar who is among the most prominent in his or her field of study on a global scale, and whose work powerfully affects the research agenda at LUT School of Business.
The following scholars have been awarded the Viipuri Prize:
David Teece, University of California, Berkeley (2003)
James G. March, Stanford University (2004)
Peter Buckley, University of Leeds (2006)
Sidney G. Winter, University of Pennsylvania (2008)
C. K. Prahalad, University of Michigan (2010)
John Kay, London School of Economics (2012)
Constance E. Helfat, Tuck School of Business (2014)Viljo Immonen, 1969 – 1970
Erkki Kinnunen, 1971 – 1975
Niilo Teeri, 1975 – 1977
Juhani Jaakkola
Markku Lukka, 1998 – 2008
Ilkka Pöyhönen, 2008 – 2014
Anneli Pauli, 2014 – 2016
Juha-Matti Saksa, 2016 - PresentLAB University of Applied Sciences
Heibei University of Technology
List of universities in FinlandOfficial site
LUT Student Union