Feeding is the process by which organisms, typically animals, obtain food. Terminology often uses either the suffixes -vore, -vory, or -vorous from Latin vorare, meaning "to devour", or -phage, -phagy, or -phagous from Greek φαγεῖν (phagein), meaning "to eat".
The evolution of feeding is varied with some feeding strategies evolving several times in independent lineages. In terrestrial vertebrates, the earliest forms were large amphibious piscivores 400 million years ago. While amphibians continued to feed on fish and later insects, reptiles began exploring two new food types, other tetrapods (carnivory), and later, plants (herbivory). Carnivory was a natural transition from insectivory for medium and large tetrapods, requiring minimal adaptation (in contrast, a complex set of adaptations was necessary for feeding on highly fibrous plant materials).
The specialization of organisms towards specific food sources is one of the major causes of evolution of form and function, such as:
mouth parts and teeth, such as in whales, vampire bats, leeches, mosquitos, predatory animals such as felines and fishes, etc.
distinct forms of beaks in birds, such as in hawks, woodpeckers, pelicans, hummingbirds, parrots, kingfishers, etc.
specialized claws and other appendages, for apprehending or killing (including fingers in primates)
changes in body colour for facilitating camouflage, disguise, setting up traps for preys, etc.
changes in the digestive system, such as the system of stomachs of herbivores, commensalism and symbiosisThere are many modes of feeding that animals exhibit, including:
Filter feeding: obtaining nutrients from particles suspended in water
Deposit feeding: obtaining nutrients from particles suspended in soil
Fluid feeding: obtaining nutrients by consuming other organisms' fluids
Bulk feeding: obtaining nutrients by eating all of an organism.
Ram feeding and suction feeding: ingesting prey via the fluids around it.Extra-cellular digestion: excreting digesting enzymes and then reabsorbing the products
Myzocytosis: one cell pierces another using a feeding tube, and sucks out cytoplasm
Phagocytosis: engulfing food matter into living cells, where it is digestedPolyphagy is the ability of an animal to eat a variety of food, whereas monophagy is the intolerance of every food except of one specific type (see generalist and specialist species).
Another classification refers to the specific food animals specialize in eating, such as:
Carnivore: the eating of animals
Araneophagy: eating spiders
Avivore: eating birds
Corallivore: Eating Coral
Durophagy: eating hard-shelled or exoskeleton bearing organisms
Egg predation: eating eggs (but also see "Intrauterine cannibalism" below), also Ovivore
Haematophagy/Sanguivory: eating blood
Insectivore: eating insects
Myrmecophagy: eating ants and/or termites
Invertivore: eating invertebrates
Keratophagy or Ceratophagy: eating horny material, such as wool by cloths moths, or snakes eating their own skin after ecdysis.
Lepidophagy: eating fish scales
Molluscivore: eating molluscs
Mucophagy: eating mucus
Ophiophagy: eating snakes
Piscivore: eating fish
Anurophagy: eating frogs
Spongivore: eating sponges
Teuthophagore: eating mainly squid and other cephalopods
Vermivore: eating worms
Zooplanktonivore: eating zooplankton
Herbivory: the eating of plants
Exudativory: eating plant and/or insect exudates (gum, sap, lerp, etc.)
Gumivore: eating tree gum
Folivory: eating leaves
Florivory: eating flower tissue prior to seed coat formation
Frugivory: eating fruits
Graminivory: eating grasses
Granivory: eating seeds
Nectarivory: eating nectar
Palynivory: eating pollen
Phytoplanktonivory: eating phytoplankton
Xylophagy: eating wood
Omnivore: the eating of both plants, animals, fungi, bacteria etc. The term means "all-eater".
By amount of meat in diet
Hypercarnivore: more than 70% meat
Mesocarnivore: 30–70% meat
Hypocarnivore: less than 30% meat
Fungivore: the eating of fungus
Bacterivore: the eating of bacteriaThe eating of non-living or decaying matter:
Coprophagy: eating faeces
Detritivore: eating decomposing material
Geophagy: eating inorganic earth
Osteophagy: eating bones
Saprophagy: eating decaying organic matter
Scavenger: eating carrionThere are also several unusual feeding behaviours, either normal, opportunistic, or pathological, such as:
Cannibalism: feeding on members of the same species
Anthropophagy: the practice of eating human flesh
Intrauterine cannibalism
Oophagy or Ovophagy: the embryo/foetus eats sibling eggs
Embryophagy: the foetus eats sibling embryos
Filial cannibalism
Self-cannibalism: feeding on parts of one's own body (see also autophagy)
Sexual cannibalism: cannibalism after mating
Kleptoparasitism: stealing food from another animal
Kleptopharmacophagy: act of stealing chemical compounds for consumption
Lignophagia: eating wood, typically a pathological condition in some domestic animals
Paedophagy: eating young animals
Pica: appetite for largely non-nutritive substances, e.g. clay or hair, sometimes in pregnancy or in pathological states, typically a medical or veterinary concern.
Placentophagy: eating placenta
Trophallaxis: eating food regurgitated by another animal
Zoopharmacognosy: self-medication by eating plants, soils, and insects to treat and prevent disease.An opportunistic feeder sustains itself from a number of different food sources, because the species is behaviourally sufficiently flexible.
Some animals exhibit hoarding and caching behaviours in which they store or hide food for later use.
Consumer-resource systems
Dinosaur diet and feeding
List of abnormal behaviours in animals
Ingestive behaviors, the physiological behaviors of feeding