Investor AB is a Swedish investment and de facto conglomerate holding company. It was founded in 1916, and is still controlled by the Wallenberg family through their Foundation Asset Management company FAM. The company owns a controlling stake in several large Swedish companies, with smaller positions in a number of other firms.
Investor AB was established by the Wallenberg family in Stockholm in 1916, when new Swedish legislation made it more difficult for banks to own stocks in industrial companies on a long-term basis. The shareholdings of the family bank, Stockholms Enskilda Bank (SEB today), were transferred to Investor AB, a newly formed industrial holding company spun out of the bank.
Investor AB own significant minority stakes in listed companies and are typically the largest shareholder. 
ABB - Provides electrification products, robotics and motion, industrial automation and power grids.
AstraZeneca - A biopharmaceutical company.
Atlas Copco - Provides compressors, vacuum and air treatment systems, construction equipment, power tools, and assembly systems.
Electrolux - Provides household appliances for consumer use.
Electrolux Professional - food service, beverage and laundry for professional use, spun-off from Electrolux AB in 2020.
Epiroc - mining, infrastructure and natural resources.
Ericsson - Provides communications technology and services.
Husqvarna AB - Provides outdoor power products, consumer watering products, cutting equipment, and diamond tools.
Nasdaq, Inc. - Provides financial services and controls stock exchanges
Saab - Products for military defense and civil security.
SEB - A financial services group with main focus on the Nordic countries, Germany, and the Baltics.
Sobi - Biopharmaceutics
Wärtsilä - marine and power engine development.Patricia Industries' key focus is to invest in and develop wholly-owned companies. 
BraunAbility - automotive mobility products
Laborie - Develops, designs, and distributes innovative capital equipment for the urology and gastroenterology sectors, with complementing and recurring high-volume sales of disposable catheters
Mölnlycke Health Care - Designs, manufactures, and supplies single use products for managing wounds
Permobil - powered and manual wheelchairs, as well as cushions and accessories
Piab - A provider of gripping and moving for automated manufacturing and logistics processes
Sarnova - A provider of healthcare products to emergency care providers, hospitals, schools, businesses, and federal government agencies
Advanced Instruments - osmolality testing instrumentation and consumables for the clinical, biopharmaceutical, and food & beverage markets
Vectura - Develops, owns and manages real estate
3 Scandinavia - Provides mobile voice and broadband services in Sweden and Denmark
Financial Investments - Financial Investments consist of investments in which the investment horizon has not yet been definedInvestments in EQT AB and EQT Funds.
EQT Partners - EQT manages and advises a range of specialized investment funds, and other investment vehicles that invest across the world with the mission to generate attractive returns and future-proof companies. As one of EQT's founders in 1994, Investor has invested in most of its funds.Johan Forssell [sv] - CEO from 2015 to present, member of the Management Group since 2006
Helena Saxon - CFO, member of the Management Group since 2015
Petra Hedengran - General Counsel, Head of Corporate Governance and responsible for investments in EQT funds, member of the Management Group since 2007
Daniel Nodhäll - Head of Listed Companies, member of the Management Group since 2015
Viveka Hirdman-Ryrberg - Head of Corporate Communication & Sustainability, member of the Management Group since 2018
Christian Cederholm - Head of Patricia Industries, member of the Extended Management Group since 2017
Jessica Häggström - Head of HR, member of the Extended Management Group since 2017IBX - purchasing services (sold to Capgemini in 2010)
WM-data - IT services (sold in August 2006)
Saab Automobile - acquired by General Motors
Scania - divested its holding to Volkswagen AG in 2008
Bredbandsbolaget (BBB) - a broadband and telecoms provider. This was initially in difficulty but was sold in 2005 to Telenor for a profit.
OMX - financial services company (sold in May 2007 to Nasdaq, Inc.)Ratos
Investment AB Kinnevik
Investment AB Latour
L E Lundbergföretagen AB
Aktiebolaget IndustrivärdenYahoo! - Investor AB company profile