The Declaration of 1 November 1954 is the first independentist appeal addressed by the National Liberation Front (FLN) to the Algerian people, marking the start of the Algerian Revolution and the armed action of the National Liberation Army (ALN).
When the Movement for the Triumph of Democratic Liberties (MTLD) organized its congress in April 1953, the independence option was decided, but the date for the hasty announcement of the insurrection had not yet been set.
It was journalist Mohamed Aïchaoui who was entrusted with the task of writing the revolutionary declaration under the supervision of the two leaders Mohamed Boudiaf and Mourad Didouche of the Group of Six.
The leaflets for this proclamation were drawn in the house of activist Ali Zamoum located in the village of Ighil Imoula in Great Kabylia.
These sheets were then put in briefcases and suitcases to be sent to their destinations in Algeria and abroad.
This declaration aimed at Algerian national independence by:
The restoration of the sovereign, democratic and social Algerian state within the framework of Islamic principles.
Respect for all fundamental freedoms without distinction of races and confessions.Political cleansing by putting the revolutionary national movement back on its true path and by destroying all the vestiges of corruption and reformism, the cause of the Algerian people regression.
Gathering and organization of all the healthy energies of the Algerian people for the liquidation of the colonial system.Internationalization of the Algerian problem.
Achievement of North African Unity.
Within the framework of the United Nations Charter, affirmation of the Algerian sympathy towards all nations which would support the liberating action.In accordance with revolutionary principles and taking into account internal and external situations, the continuation of the struggle by all means until the achievement of the independence goal.
To achieve these ends, the National Liberation Front will have two essential tasks to carry out simultaneously: internal action, both politically and in terms of its action, and external action in order to deal with the Algerian cause which will be a reality for the whole world with the support of all natural allies of Algerians.
This is an overwhelming task which requires the mobilization of all national energies and resources. It is true, the struggle will be long but the outcome is certain.
Algerian War
National Liberation Front
National Liberation Army
Mohamed Aïchaoui
Mohamed Boudiaf
Mourad Didouche
Rabah Bitat
Abane Ramdane1- Proclamation of 1 November 1954 on YouTube
2- Proclamation of 1 November 1954 on YouTube
3- Ighil Imoula: Place of printing of the proclamation of 1 November 1954 on YouTube
4- Mohamed Aïchaoui wrote the proclamation 1 November 1954 on the digging machine on YouTube