Guernésiais, also known as Dgèrnésiais, Guernsey French, and Guernsey Norman French, is the variety of the Norman language spoken in Guernsey. It is sometimes known on the island simply as  "patois". As one of the langues d'oïl, it has its roots in Latin, but has had strong influence from both Old Norse and English at different points in its history.
There is mutual intelligibility (with some difficulty) with Jèrriais speakers from Jersey and Continental Norman speakers from Normandy. Guernésiais most closely resembles the Norman dialect of Cotentinais spoken in La Hague in the Cotentin Peninsula of France.
Guernésiais has been influenced less by Standard French than Jèrriais, but conversely more so by English. New words have been imported for modern phenomena: e.g. le bike and le gas-cooker.
There is a rich tradition of poetry in the Guernsey language. Guernsey songs were inspired by the sea, by colourful figures of speech, by traditional folk-lore, as well as by the natural environment of the island. The island's greatest poet was George Métivier (1790–1881), a contemporary of Victor Hugo, who influenced and inspired local poets to print and publish their traditional poetry. Métivier blended local place-names, bird and animal names, traditional sayings and orally transmitted fragments of medieval poetry to create his Rimes Guernesiaises (1831). Denys Corbet (1826–1910) was considered the "Last Poet" of Guernsey French and published many poems in his day in his native tongue in the island newspaper and privately.
The most recent dictionary of Guernésiais, Dictiounnaire Angllais-guernesiais by Marie de Garis, was published in 1967 and revised in 1982.
The 2001 census showed that 1327 (1262 Guernsey-born) or 2% of the population speak the language fluently while 3% fully understand the language. However most of these, 70% or 934 of the 1327 fluent speakers, are over 64 years old. Among the young only 0.1% or one in a thousand are fluent speakers. However, 14% of the population claim some understanding of the language.
L'Assembllaïe d'Guernesiais, an association for speakers of the language founded in 1957, has published a periodical. Les Ravigoteurs, another association, has published a storybook and cassette for children.
Forest School hosts an annual speaking contest of the island's primary school children (Year 6).
The annual Eisteddfod provides an opportunity for performances in the language, and radio and newspaper outlets furnish regular media output.
There is some teaching of the language in voluntary classes in schools in Guernsey.
Evening classes are available, as of 2013.
Lunchtime classes are offered at the Guernsey Museum, as of 2013.
Along with Jèrriais, Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Welsh, Manx and Scots (in Scotland as well as the Ulster Scots dialects), Guernésiais is recognised as a regional language by the British and Irish governments within the framework of the British–Irish Council.
BBC Radio Guernsey and the Guernsey Press both feature occasional lessons.
A Guernésiais language development officer was appointed (with effect from January 2008).There is little broadcasting in the language, with ITV Channel Television more or less ignoring the language, and only the occasional short feature on BBC Radio Guernsey, usually for learners.
The creation of a Guernsey Language Commission was announced on 7 February 2013 as an initiative by government to preserve the linguistic culture. The Commission has operated since Liberation Day, 9 May 2013.
Guernsey poet George Métivier (1790–1881) – nicknamed the Guernsey Burns, was the first to produce a dictionary of the Norman language in the Channel Islands, the Dictionnaire Franco-Normand (1870). This established the first standard orthography – later modified and modernised. Among his poetical works are Rimes Guernesiaises published in 1831.
Prince Louis Lucien Bonaparte published the Gospel of Matthew by George Métivier in Dgèrnésiais in London in 1863 as part of his philological research.
Like Métivier, Tam Lenfestey (1818–1885) published poetry in Guernsey newspapers and in book form.
Denys Corbet (1826–1909) described himself as the Draïn Rimeux (last poet), but literary production continued. Corbet is best known for his poems, especially the epic L'Touar de Guernesy, a picaresque tour of the parishes of Guernsey. As editor of the French-language newspaper Le Bailliage, he also wrote feuilletons in Dgèrnésiais under the pen name Badlagoule ("chatterbox"). In 2009 the island held a special exhibition in the Forest Parish on Corbet and his work acknowledging the centenary of his death and unveiling a contemporary portrait painting of the artist by Christian Corbet a cousin to Denys Corbet.
Thomas Martin (1839–1921) translated into Guernésiais the Bible, the plays of William Shakespeare, twelve plays by Pierre Corneille, three plays by Thomas Corneille, twenty seven plays by Molière, twenty plays by Voltaire and The Spanish Student by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.
Thomas Henry Mahy (1862–21 April 1936) wrote Dires et Pensées du Courtil Poussin, a regular column in La Gazette Officielle de Guernesey, from 1916. A collection was published in booklet form in 1922. He was still publishing occasional pieces of poetry and prose by the start of the 1930s.
Thomas Alfred Grut (1852–1933) published Des lures guernesiaises in 1927, once again a collection of newspaper columns. He also translated some of the Jèrriais stories of Philippe Le Sueur Mourant into Dgèrnésiais.
Marjorie Ozanne (1897–1973) wrote stories, published in the Guernsey Evening Press between 1949 and 1965. Some earlier pieces can be found in La Gazette de Guernesey in the 1920s.
Ken Hill translated many of Marjorie Ozanne's short stories and poems into English with the Guernsey accent of the early 20th century.  The work was published by the Guernsey society.
Métivier's dictionary was superseded by Marie de Garis' (1910–2010) Dictiounnaire Angllais-Guernésiais; first edition published in 1967, supplements 1969 and 1973, third edition 1982.
When the Channel Islands were invaded by Germany in World War II, Dgèrnésiais experienced a minor revival. Many Guernsey people did not always wish the occupying forces to understand what they were saying, especially as some of the soldiers had knowledge of English.
Victor Hugo includes the odd word of Dgèrnésiais in some of his Channel Island novels. Hugo's novel Toilers of the Sea (French: Les Travailleurs de la mer), is credited with introducing the Guernesiais word for octopus, pieuvre, into the French language (standard French for octopus is poulpe).
A collection of short stories P'tites Lures Guernésiaises (in Guernésiais with parallel English translation) by various writers was published in 2006.George Métivier translated the Gospel of Matthew into Guernésiais and it was published in London in 1863.  This is now online.
Thomas Martin translated the whole Bible into Guernésiais and this has never been published./r/ may also be heard as a tap sound [ɾ].
/tʃ, dʒ/ are heard by different dialects as well as older speakers as palatalized plosives [kʲ, ɡʲ].Vowel sounds /a, ã/; /aː, ãː/ may also be heard as near open [æ, æ̃]; [æː, æ̃ː].Metathesis of /r/ is common in Guernésiais, by comparison with Sercquiais and Jèrriais.
Other examples are pourmenade (promenade), persentaïr (present), terpid (tripod).
aver, have (auxiliary verb)
oimaïr, to love (regular conjugation)


Guernésiais(Pronunciation)

English

French


Quaï temps qu’i fait?

What's the weather like?

Quel temps fait-il ?


I' fait caoud ogniet

It's warm today

Il fait chaud aujourd'hui


Tchi qu’est vote naom?

What's your name?

Formal: Comment vous appellez-vous ?Colloquial: Comment t'appelles-tu ? / Comment tu t'appelles ?Quel est votre nom ?


Coume tchi que l’affaire va?(kum chik la-fehr va)

How are you?Lit. How's business going?

Comment vont les affaires ?


Quaï heure qu'il est?

What's the time?

Quelle heure est-il ?


À la perchoine(a la per-shoy-n)

See you next time

Au revoirÀ la prochaine


Mercie bian

Thank you very much

Merci beaucoupColl: Merci bien


chén-chin

this

ceci


ch'techin

this one

celui-ci


Lâtchiz-mé

Leave me

Laissez-moi
Auregnais dialect
Literature in the other languages of Britain
Sarnia Cherie
SercquiaisDe Garis, Marie (5 November 1982). Dictiounnaire Angllais-Guernésiais. Phillimore & Co Ltd. ISBN 978-0-85033-462-3.What is Dgernesiais?
Guernesiais today by Julia Sallabank – from the BBC
Texts in Dgèrnésiais
La Societe Guernesiaise