The 1992 CONCACAF Champions' Cup was the 28th edition of the annual international club football competition held in the CONCACAF region (North America, Central America and the Caribbean), the CONCACAF Champions' Cup.  It determined that year's club champion of football in the CONCACAF region and was played from 1 February 1992 till 5 January 1993.
The teams were split in 2 zones (North/Central and Caribbean), each one qualifying two teams to the final tournament.  All qualifying matches were played under the home/away match system, while the final was played in California, USA.  Both zones were also split into 2 groups, so one team of each qualified to the finals.
Unlike previous editions, the final was played in a single match at Los Angeles (neutral venue), where Mexican Club América beat Costa Rican Liga Deportiva Alajuelense 1–0, therefore winning their four CONCACAF trophy.
Motagua, Luis Ángel Firpo and Alajuelense advanced to Second Round.Alajuelense advanced to Third Round.  Luis Ángel Firpo on a bye.Vancouver 86ers withdrew before 1st leg*
All clubs in BOLD advance to the second round.S.F. Bay Blackhawks and Dallas Rockets advance to the Third Round.Dallas Rockets and S.F. Bay Blackhawks advance to the Fourth Round.Club América advance to the Fifth Round.Club América advance to the CONCACAF Final Series.Preliminary Round
San Cristobal Bancredicard advance to the first round.First Round
RKVFC Sithoc, Aiglon du Lamentin, SV Transvaal and Solidarité Scolaire advance to the second round.Second Round
RKVFC Sithoc and Aiglon du Lamentin  advance to the third round.Third Round
Aiglon du Lamentin advance to the CONCACAF Final Series.Preliminary Round
Guayama F.C. withdrew.*
Rockmaster F.C. advance to the first round.First Round
Scholars FC withdrew before 1st leg*
SV Robinhood, Mayaro United, US Robert and L'Etoile de Morne-à-l'Eau advance to the second round.Second Round
L'Etoile de Morne-à-l'Eau and SV Robinhood advance to the third round.Third Round
SV Robinhood advance to the CONCACAF Final Series.October 7, 1992
Played in Santiago de Querétaro, Querétaro - (MEX)
Played in San José, Costa Rica
