The 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup is scheduled to be the 9th edition of the FIFA Women's World Cup, the quadrennial world championship for women's national football teams organised by FIFA. The tournament will be jointly hosted by Australia and New Zealand, the first time that the FIFA Women's World Cup will have two host nations, and is scheduled to take place from 20 July to 20 August 2023. The 2023 tournament will see the Women's World Cup expanded from 24 to 32 teams.
The United States are the defending champions, having won the previous two tournaments in 2015 and 2019.
FIFA announced that bidding had begun for the 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup on 19 February 2019. Member associations interested in hosting the tournament had to submit a declaration of interest by 15 March, and provide the completed bidding registration by 16 April. However, FIFA revised the bidding timeline as the tournament expanded to 32 teams on 31 July. Other member associations interested in hosting the tournament now had until 16 August to submit a declaration of interest, while the completed bidding registration of new member associations and re-confirmation of prior bidders was due by 2 September.
Nine countries initially indicated interest in hosting the events: Argentina, Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Japan, South Korea (with interest in a joint bid with North Korea), New Zealand and South Africa. Belgium expressed interest in hosting the tournament following the new deadline but later dropped out with Bolivia in September 2019. Australia and New Zealand later announced they would merge their bids in a joint submission. Brazil, Colombia, and Japan joined them in submitting their bid books to FIFA by 13 December. However, both Brazil and Japan later withdrew their bids in June 2020 before the final voting.
On 25 June 2020, Australia and New Zealand won the bid to host the Women's World Cup. The decision came after a vote by the FIFA Council, with the winning bid earning 22 votes, while Colombia earned 13. Neither country had previously hosted a senior FIFA tournament. This will be the first Women's World Cup to be hosted in multiple countries, and only the second World Cup tournament to do so, following the 2002 FIFA World Cup. It is also the first FIFA Women's World Cup to be held in the southern hemisphere, the first senior FIFA tournament to be held in Oceania, and the first FIFA tournament to be hosted across multiple confederations (with Australia in the AFC and New Zealand in the OFC). Australia is the second association from the AFC to host the Women's World Cup, after China in both 1991 and 2007.
In July 2019, FIFA President Gianni Infantino proposed an expansion of the Women's World Cup from 24 to 32 teams, starting with the 2023 edition, and doubling the tournament's prize money. The proposal came following the success of the 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup and the prior edition of the tournament in 2015, which after increasing from 16 to 24 teams set an attendance record for all FIFA competitions besides the men's FIFA World Cup. Expanding the tournament to allow eight additional participating teams gave more member associations a greater opportunity to qualify for the final tournament. This fostered the growing reach and professionalisation of the women's game.
On 31 July, the FIFA Council unanimously decided to expand the tournament to 32 teams, featuring eight groups of four.
The tournament opens with a group stage consisting of eight groups of four teams, with the top two teams progressing from each group to a knockout tournament starting with a round of 16 teams. The number of games played overall increases from 52 to 64. The tournament replicates the format of the FIFA World Cup used between 1998 and 2022.
The tournament also acts as the UEFA qualifiers for the 2024 Paris Olympic Games. The best-two UEFA teams from the World Cup will qualify (not including Olympic hosts France).
FIFA’s confederations organise their qualifications through continental championships, with the exception of UEFA which organise their own qualifying competition. Australia and New Zealand, as co-hosts, qualified automatically for the tournament leaving the remaining 207 FIFA member associations eligible to enter qualifications if they chose to do so. Australia competed in the 2022 AFC Women's Asian Cup, whilst New Zealand did not enter the OFC Women's Nations Cup the same year. The reigning Women’s World Cup champions USA compete in qualifications through the CONCACAF W Championship as normal. Chad and Pakistan football associations were suspended by FIFA, thus excluding them from entering qualifications. Rwanda, Sudan, DR Congo and São Tomé and Príncipe entered qualifications but withdrew later. Kenya withdrew before the second round of qualifiers. North Korea and Turkmenistan withdrew from the Women's Asian Cup qualifiers due to safety concerns and travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Iraq withdrew after the AFC draw. Due to the uncertainty of women’s sport after the Taliban takeover of the country, Afghanistan withdrew from qualification. Due to COVID-19 pandemic outbreaks in their squads, Women's Asian Cup hosts India withdrew from competition. American Samoa withdrew due to continuing difficulties related to the pandemic.
The allocation of slots for each confederation was confirmed by the FIFA Council on 25 December 2020:
AFC (Asia): 6 slots*
CAF (Africa): 4 slots
CONCACAF (North America, Central America and the Caribbean): 4 slots
CONMEBOL (South America): 3 slots
OFC (Oceania): 1 slot*
UEFA (Europe): 11 slots
Inter-confederation play-off tournament: 3 slots(*) The slots for the two host nations, Australia and New Zealand, were taken directly from the quotas allocated to their confederations, the AFC and OFC respectively.
A ten-team play-off tournament will decide the final three spots at the Women's World Cup. The play-off slot allocation is as follows:
AFC (Asia): 2 slots
CAF (Africa): 2 slots
CONCACAF (North America, Central America and the Caribbean): 2 slots
CONMEBOL (South America): 2 slots
OFC (Oceania): 1 slot
UEFA (Europe): 1 slotOn 9 December 2019, the World Anti-Doping Agency initially handed Russia a four-year ban from all major sporting events, after Russian Anti-Doping Agency (RUSADA) was found non-compliant for handing over manipulated laboratory data to investigators. However, the Russia national team could still enter qualification, as the ban only applies to the final tournament to decide the world champions. The WADA ruling allowed athletes who were not involved in doping or the coverup to compete; however, a team representing Russia that uses the Russian flag and anthem cannot participate under the WADA decision. The decision was appealed to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, which upheld WADA's ban but reduced it to two years. The CAS ruling also allowed the name "Russia" to be displayed on uniforms if the words "Neutral Athlete" or "Neutral Team" have equal prominence. Had Russia qualified for the tournament, its female players would have been able to use their country's name, flag or anthem at the Women's World Cup, unlike their male counterparts, as the ban will expire on 16 December 2022. However, following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, FIFA officially overturned the decision, implemented an indefinite ban on Russia from participating in any FIFA tournament until further updates, and officially ruled out Russia from participating in the 2023 Women's World Cup.
As of 26 July 2022, 21 nations have qualified for the finals, including 14 that competed at the previous tournament in 2019. Morocco, the Philippines, Vietnam and Zambia will be making their debut in the FIFA Women's World Cup, and as a result also competing in their first ever seniors FIFA tournament: the World Cup being the first ever FIFA tournament the Philippines have taken part in; this is Vietnam's first ever FIFA women's competition, having only taken part in various FIFA men's tournaments; Zambia made history as the first landlocked country in Africa to qualify for a World Cup in either gender, while Morocco became the first-ever Arab country to qualify for the Women's World Cup. Denmark made their first appearance in 16 years after missing out in three consecutive tournaments, with their last appearance being in 2007, while Costa Rica and Colombia returned to the tournament after missing the previous tournament in 2019.
The final draw is scheduled to take place at the Aotea Centre in Auckland, New Zealand, on 22 October 2022, prior to the completion of qualification. The three winners of the inter-confederation play-off will not be known at the time of the draw.
For the draw, the 32 teams will be allocated into four pots based on the FIFA Women's World Rankings. The teams competing will be drawn in to eight groups of four teams, with the hosts New Zealand and Australia automatically placed in positions A1 and B1, respectively.
Australia and New Zealand proposed 13 possible venues across 12 host cities for the tournament in the bid book submitted to FIFA, suggesting a minimum of 10 stadiums be used—five in each country. The original proposal of the joint bid would have seen the venues be divided into three main travel hubs: South Hub containing Perth, Adelaide, Launceston and Melbourne, East Hub containing Brisbane, Newcastle, Sydney, Melbourne and Launceston, and New Zealand Hub containing Auckland, Hamilton, Wellington, Christchurch, and Dunedin. The Sydney Football Stadium was the only new stadium within the bid that is undergoing a major renovation replacing the old Football Stadium on the same site.
The bid evaluation was released on 10 June 2020 by FIFA, which noted that the majority of the stadiums listed in the bid meet FIFA’s hosting requirements with capacity, aside from Adelaide and Auckland which didn’t meet the minimum requirements capacity wise for stages of the competition proposed for. Most stadiums featured in the bid, are planned to have minor renovations with new floodlighting, pitch renovations and gender-neutral changing rooms in time for the tournament.
On 31 March 2021, FIFA announced the final host city and venue selections. Five cities and six stadiums will be used in Australia, and four cities and stadiums in New Zealand. From the proposed venues, Newcastle and Launceston were not selected in Australia, and Christchurch was omitted in New Zealand. Eden Park in Auckland will host the opening game, with Stadium Australia in Sydney to host the 2023 Women's World Cup final match. As a part of the branding, all cities will use their native names (Indigenous Australian and Māori in New Zealand) alongside their English names in an effort to reconcile and respect the original owners of the land.
The match schedule was announced by FIFA on 1 December 2021 without kick-off times. The opening match of the tournament, featuring co-hosts New Zealand, will be played on 20 July 2023 at Eden Park. Whilst the inaugural match in Australia, will take place on the same day at Sydney Football Stadium. The group stage fixtures will be split between the co-hosts with each hosting four groups. The third-place match will be played at Lang Park on 19 August 2023, with the final to be played at Stadium Australia on 20 August 2023.
Due to the structure of the match schedule, Australia are the only confirmed team to play all their fixtures in one country.
The group stage fixtures for each group will be allocated to the following host country:
Groups A, C, E, G: New Zealand (Auckland, Dunedin,  Hamilton, Wellington)
Groups B, D, F, H: Australia (Adelaide, Brisbane, Melbourne, Perth, Sydney)Competing countries will be divided into eight groups of four teams (groups A to H). Teams in each group will play one another in a round-robin, with the top two teams advancing to the knockout stage.
In the knockout stage, if a match is level at the end of 90 minutes of normal playing time, extra time will be played (two periods of 15 minutes each). If the score was still level after extra time, the winners will be determined by a penalty shoot-out.
The official emblem was jointly designed by Toronto-based studio Public Address and Los Angeles-based Works Creative agency and unveiled on 28 October 2021 during a live show. The emblem features a soccer ball encircled by 32 coloured squares, reflecting the expanded field of the tournament, and the natural terrains of the two host nations. The overall branding of the tournament will feature designs reflecting the host nations' Indigenous peoples, created by Australian artist Chern'ee Sutton and Maori artist Fiona Collis. Furthermore, the tournament's branding will also incorporate the native names of all host cities. Alongside the emblem, the official slogan of the tournament, "Beyond Greatness", reflects FIFA's goal for the event to further expand the prominence of women's football, was also revealed. The names of the host cities in their native names (Indigenous Australian and Māori in New Zealand) were used as part of the official branding.
On 28 October 2021 same day as the official emblem and slogan unveiling, British DJ and music producer Kelly Lee Owens released "Unity" as the theme song for the event.
Official website
Australia-New Zealand 2023 bid website