The Inter-Agency Task Force for the Management of Emerging Infectious Diseases (IATF-EID) is a task force organized by the executive of the government of the Philippines to respond to affairs concerning emerging infectious diseases in the country.
The IATF-EID was created through Executive Order No. 168 issued by President Benigno Aquino III in 2014. It was organized as the government's instrument to assess, monitor, contain, control and prevent the spread of any potential epidemic in the Philippines.
The IATF-EID convened in January 2020 to address the growing viral outbreak in Wuhan, China. They made a resolution to manage the spreading of the new virus, which was known at the time as 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) and eventually renamed to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus that causes COVID-19. On March 9, 2020, President Duterte called the IATF-EID amidst the rising cases of COVID-19 in the Philippines.
On March 25, 2020, the IATF-EID revealed a National Action Plan (NAP) to slow down the spread of COVID-19. The NAP was created to effectively and efficiently implement and decentralize the system of managing the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the IATF-EID created the National Task Force Against COVID-19 headed by Department of National Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana, which handles the operational command. At the same time, the IATF-EID became the "policy-making body of operations" while the National Incident Command administers the daily concerns and operations.
The Joint Task Force COVID-19 Shield headed by Police Lt. Gen. Ferdinand O. Divina is a task force intended to enforce quarantine protocols in border checkpoints and streets, and maintain peace, order, and security throughout the country to help control the spread of COVID-19. The task force is composed of the Philippine National Police (PNP), the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), the Philippine Coast Guard (PCG), the Bureau of Fire Protection (BFP), and Barangay tanods.
The IATF-EID  appointed Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA) Chairperson Romando Artes and Bangsamoro Chief Minister Murad Ebrahim to lead the regional inter-agency task groups in Metro Manila and Bangsamoro, respectively. The Office of Civil Defense was tasked to lead the regional task forces in other regions. Local Chief Executives of Municipalities, Cities, Provinces, and Barangays are also tasked as Chairpersons of the Local Task Forces.
The IATF-EID is composed of the following executive departments and agencies:
Chair: Department of Health
Co-Chair:
Office of the Cabinet Secretary
Department of Environment and Natural Resources
Members
Department of Agriculture
Department of Budget and Management
Department of Education
Department of Finance
Department of Foreign Affairs
Department of Information and Communications Technology
Department of the Interior and Local Government
Department of Justice
Department of Labor and Employment
Department of National Defense
Department of Public Works and Highways
Department of Science and Technology
Department of Social Welfare and Development
Department of the Interior and Local Government
Department of Tourism
Department of Trade and Industry
Department of Transportation
Presidential Communications Operations Office
Office of the Executive Secretary
Office of the Presidential Spokesperson
Commission on Higher Education
Technical Education and Skills Development Authority
National Economic and Development Authority
Office of the Chief Presidential Legal Counsel
Civil Service CommissionThe Joint Task Force COVID-19 Shield is composed of the following who will ensure that IATF Guidelines/Protocols are strictly enforced.
Lead Agency: Philippine National Police
Members:
Armed Forces of the Philippines
Bureau of Fire Protection
Philippine Coast Guard
All local government units