This is a list of countries by natural disaster risk, as measured in the World Risk Index, calculated by the United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNU-EHS) and featured in the 2016 World Risk Report (WRR 2016) published by the Alliance Development Works/Bündnis Entwicklung Hilft (BEH).
The report systematically considers a country's vulnerability and its exposure to natural hazards to determine a ranking of countries around the world based on their natural disaster risk. The WRI developed by UNU-EHS and BEH the main feature of the WRR, determines the risk of becoming a victim of a disaster as a result of vulnerability and natural hazards such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, storms, floods, droughts and sea level rise for 173 countries worldwide. The WRI is based on 28 indicators and research data which are globally freely available and results in a global risk ranking and maps which allow for comparison between countries. Risk is at its highest where a high level of exposure to natural hazards coincides with very vulnerable societies.
 Andorra (landlocked)
 Antigua and Barbuda
 Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Dominica
 Federated States of Micronesia
 Liechtenstein
 Maldives
 Marshall Islands
 Monaco
 Montenegro
 Nauru
 North Korea
 Palau
 Saint Lucia
 Samoa
 San Marino
 São Tomé and Príncipe
 Somalia
 South Sudan
 Saint Kitts and Nevis
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
 TuvaluThese countries were excluded because of the lack of data.
Effects of climate change on humans
Gamma-ray burst
Emergency management
Civil defence
Disaster risk reduction
Environmental disaster
List of environmental disasters
Environmental emergency
List of natural disasters by death toll
Property insurance against natural disasters
Survivalism
World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction"Natural Disasters News". Ubyrisk. Archived from the original on 2018-11-01. Retrieved 2020-03-08. Worldwide news site focused on natural disasters, mitigation and climate changes news
"Global Risk Identification Program (GRIP)". GRIP.
"BioCaster Global Health Monitor". National Institute of Informatics (NII). Archived from the original on 2014-05-04.
"World Bank's Hazard Risk Management". World Bank. Archived from the original on 2010-04-09. Retrieved 2014-05-04.
"Disaster News Network". Archived from the original on 2006-11-05. Retrieved 2006-11-05. US news site focused on disaster-related news.
"EM-DAT International Disaster Database". Archived from the original on 2008-08-11. Retrieved 2006-11-05. Includes country profiles, disaster profiles and a disaster list.
"Natural Hazard Information from the Coastal Ocean Institute". Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. Retrieved 2006-11-05. Particularly including articles on tsunamis, hurricanes and other storms.
"Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System". European Commission and United Nations website initiative.
"What the Development Programme of the United Nations (UN) does to reduce the human risks linked to Natural Disasters". United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Archived from the original on 2015-01-13.
"Pioneering Disaster Risk Index (DRI) Tool". United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Archived from the original on 2014-06-18. Provides key information on all countries in the world.
"World's Worst Natural Disasters". Retrieved 2009-07-01. Includes list of world's deadliest disasters in history.
"Natural Disaster and Extreme Weather. Searchable Information Center". Ebrary.