The following is a list providing an overview of sovereign states around the world with information on their status and recognition of their sovereignty.
The 208 listed states can be divided into three categories based on membership within the United Nations System: 193 UN member states, 2 UN observer states, and 13 other states. The sovereignty dispute column indicates states having undisputed sovereignty (188 states, of which there are 187 UN member states and 1 UN observer state), states having disputed sovereignty (18 states, of which there are 6 UN member states, 1 UN observer state, and 11 de facto states), and states having a special political status (2 states, both in free association with New Zealand).
Compiling a list such as this can be a complicated and controversial process, as there is no definition that is binding on all the members of the community of nations concerning the criteria for statehood. For more information on the criteria used to determine the contents of this list, please see the criteria for inclusion section below. The list is intended to include entities that have been recognised as having de facto status as sovereign states, and inclusion should not be seen as an endorsement of any specific claim to statehood in legal terms.
The dominant customary international law standard of statehood is the declarative theory of statehood, which was codified by the Montevideo Convention of 1933. The Convention defines the state as a person of international law if it "possess[es] the following qualifications: (a) a permanent population; (b) a defined territory; (c) government; and (d) a capacity to enter into relations with the other states" so long as it was not "obtained by force whether this consists in the employment of arms, in threatening diplomatic representations, or in any other effective coercive measure".
Debate exists on the degree to which recognition should be included as a criterion of statehood. The declarative theory of statehood argues that statehood is purely objective and recognition of a state by other states is irrelevant. On the other end of the spectrum, the constitutive theory of statehood defines a state as a person under international law only if it is recognised as sovereign by other states. For the purposes of this list, included are all polities that consider themselves sovereign states (through a declaration of independence or some other means) and either:
are often regarded as satisfying the declarative theory of statehood, or
are recognised as a sovereign state by at least one UN member stateNote that in some cases, there is a divergence of opinion over the interpretation of the first point, and whether an entity satisfies it is disputed. Unique political entities which fail to meet the classification of a sovereign state are considered proto-states.
On the basis of the above criteria, this list includes the following 208 entities:
205 states recognised by at least one UN member state
Two states that satisfy the declarative theory of statehood and are recognised only by non-UN member states: Artsakh and Transnistria
One state that satisfies the declarative theory of statehood and is not recognised by any other state: SomalilandThe table includes bullets representing entities which are either not sovereign states or have a close association to another sovereign state. It also includes subnational areas where the sovereignty of the titular state is limited by an international agreement. Taken together, these include:
States in a free association relationship to another state
Two entities controlled by Pakistan which are neither sovereign states, dependent territories, or part of another state: Azad Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan
Dependent territories of another state, as well as areas that exhibit many characteristics of dependent territories according to the dependent territory page
Subnational entities created by international agreements



"Membership within the UN System" column legend

  UN member state
  UN General Assembly observer state
  Member state of a UN Specialized Agency
  No membership


"Sovereignty dispute" column legend

  Undisputed sovereignty
  Disputed sovereignty


Bissio, Roberto Remo, ed. (1995). The World: A Third World Guide: 1995/96. Montevideo: Instituto del Tercer Mundo. ISBN 978-0-85598-291-1. OCLC 476299738.
"Countries or areas, codes and abbreviations". Statistics Division, United Nations. 1 April 2010.
Davis, Tim (19 February 2009). "World Countries and States List". TimDavis.com.au.
"Geographic Names" (PDF). Department of Public Information, Cartographic Section, United Nations. 7 September 2000.
"ISO 3166-1 Country names and code elements". International Organization for Standardization. 2010.
"List of countries, territories and currencies". Publications Office of the European Union. 4 May 2010.
"The World Factbook". United States: Central Intelligence Agency. 2010. Archived from the original on 7 June 2007.
World of Information (Firm), and International Chamber of Commerce (2003). Middle East Review 2003/04: The Economic and Business Report (27th ed.). London: Kogan Page. p. 161. ISBN 978-0-7494-4066-4. OCLC 51992589.
Slayden, Greg. "The Countries of the World". PeakBagger.com. Retrieved 24 July 2020.