During World War II a number of countries were conquered and controlled. Some of these countries were then given new names, and assigned new governmental leaders which were loyal to the conquering country.  These countries are known as puppet states. Germany and Japan were the two countries with the most puppet states. Italy also had several puppet states. The Allies had many more puppet states than all the Axis collectively: the United Kingdom possessed the largest empire in the world, followed by France and the United States had colonies, protectorates, puppets and territories throughout South Asia, the Caribbean, Central America and Polynesia. Additionally, the United Kingdom and France took control of the colonial empire of Italy following the war for many years.
Additionally, several countries captured land in the years leading up to the war which then became puppet states; those states which are immediately relevant to the war are also included here.
The Soviet Union had a number of puppet states during World War II.  Almost all of the states were previously under Soviet control or had long been of interest to the regime; almost all of them were entirely or partially under Soviet influence for some time after the war and as such are Post-Soviet states.
The Soviet Union also controlled two states post-war due to their involvement in World War II: East Germany and the Azerbaijan People's Government, however these states were gained as a result of fighting during the war and were not themselves directly involved in the conflict; as a result, they have not been included in this list.
The United Kingdom sponsored only one government widely recognized as a puppet state during World War II. Though the British did occupy Iran during the war, the British-Soviet control of the country is not traditionally seen as a puppet state due to the explicit involvement of Britain and the Soviets in the restructuring of the country's government and the relative freedom of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, who could still control what remained of the Iranian army.
Empire of Japan had been creating puppet states in China since the 1931 Mukden Incident. It established a puppet state in 1932.
German Reich had a large number of puppet states after the start of World War II. Some were countries that once supported it, but fell to the Allies. Others were countries that Germany invaded. Reichskommissariats are not included in this list.
Italy did not have nearly as many puppet states as its partner Axis countries, however, Italy did co-administer some countries in the Balkans with Germany, Greece, in particular.  Italy's puppet states were captured by Germany after the Armistice of Cassibile.
