Angie Tribeca is an American comedy television series created by Steve and Nancy Carell, which aired on TBS. The series, a parody of the police procedural genre, stars Rashida Jones as police detective Angie Tribeca. It also stars Hayes MacArthur, Jere Burns, Deon Cole and Andrée Vermeulen in supporting roles.
The first season of Angie Tribeca premiered on January 17–18, 2016, the second season premiered on June 6 of that year, and the third season premiered on April 10, 2017. The fourth and final season was released in its entirety across December 29 and December 30, 2018.
On May 9, 2019, the series was cancelled after four seasons.
Angie Tribeca is a 10-year veteran of the Los Angeles Police Department's elite RHCU (Really Heinous Crimes Unit), who is assigned a new partner. The format of each episode involves a different criminal case for the LAPD to solve. The show features nonstop witty one liners, jokes, visual humor, and irony.
The series was announced by TBS in mid-2014 with a ten-episode order.  It was promoted as "...a hilarious spoof of police procedurals in the spirit of Police Squad!". A few gags presented in the preview reel were cited as similar to the TV cop show satire Sledge Hammer!.
Originally intended to premiere in late 2015, in November 2015 it was announced that the first season of ten episodes would run uninterrupted on the network and be released through video on demand starting on January 17, 2016.  All 10 episodes of season 1 premiered during a 25-hour TV marathon on January 17–18, 2016.
A second season of an additional ten episodes premiered on June 6, 2016. On July 6, 2016, TBS renewed the series for a third season, which premiered on April 10, 2017. The fourth season, which premiered on December 29, 2018, added Bobby Cannavale to the cast.
Rashida Jones as Det. Angela "Angie" Tribeca
Hayes MacArthur as Det./Lt. Jason "Jay" Geils (seasons 1–3)
Jere Burns as Lt./Capt. Pritikin "Chet" Atkins, Angie's boss
Burns also plays Eric Atkins, Lt. Atkins' identical twin brother; Capt. Gumbo Atkins, Atkins' Cajun cousin in New Orleans; Lt. Paddy Atkins, Atkins' Irish cousin in New York
Deon Cole as Det. Daniel "DJ" Tanner (seasons 1–3; guest star: season 4)
Andrée Vermeulen as Dr. Monica Scholls, the medical examiner
Kiersey Clemons as Maria Charo, the psychiatrist (season 4)
Bobby Cannavale as Angela "AJ" Geils, Jr., Angie and Jay's son (season 4)Jagger as Det. David Hoffman, Tanner's canine partner
Alfred Molina as Dr. Edelweiss, the expert scientist (Uncredited)
Andreas Wigand as Screaming Cop Dave (Season 1)
Dillon Paigen as Vomiting Cop (Season 1)
Caitlin Kimball as Rookie Cop (Season 2)
James Franco as Sgt. Eddie Pepper
Matthew Glave as Mayor/Vice President Joe Perry
Heather Graham as Agent Diane Duran
Nancy Carell as Katy Perry, Mayor Perry's wife
Chris Pine as Dr. Thomas Hornbein
Annie Mumolo as Beth Wiedner
Rob Riggle as Calvin Sniglet/Det. Zachary Fontaine
Mary McCormack as Abigail Liukin
Alison Rich as Det. Small
John Michael Higgins as Dr. Zaius
Higgins also plays Randy Zaius, Dr. Zaius' identical twin brother
Michaela Watkins as Melanie Burke
Peggy Lipton as Peggy Tribeca, Angie's mom
Chris Kimball as Officer Kyle
Ren Hanami as Fluga
Taran Killam as Pierre CardinAngie Tribeca was met with positive reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the first season has an approval rating of 89% based on 38 reviews, with an average rating of 7.71/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Angie Tribeca's unique blend of sharp wit and broad humor – and the obvious fun being had by a talented cast – make for a consistent, charmingly absurd spoof of police procedurals." Metacritic gives it a weighted average score of 78 out of 100 based on 15 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
On Rotten Tomatoes, Seasons 2 and 3 each hold an approval rating of 100% based on five reviews.
Police Squad!, a 1982 comedy television show with the same style of humor
Sledge Hammer! (1986), a sustained satire of Dirty Harry and other action heroes
A Touch of Cloth, a similar British comedy (2012–2014)Official website 
Angie Tribeca at IMDb
Angie Tribeca  at Rotten Tomatoes