Podporozhye (Russian: Подпоро́жье; Veps: Kos’kenaluine) is a town and the administrative center of Podporozhsky District in Leningrad Oblast, Russia, located on the Svir River 285 kilometers (177 mi) northeast of St. Petersburg. Population: 18,733 (2010 Census); 20,312 (2002 Census); 23,295 (1989 Census).
In the early 18th century, Peter the Great ordered the resettlement of peasants from the Msta River to the current location of Podporozhye to organize navigation along the Svir River, known for its nearly impassable rapids. In the late 19th century, these minor settlements next to the Svir rapids (Sigovets and Medvedets) received the name of Podporozhye (literally, "under the rapids"). By the beginning of the 20th century, Podporozhye was a village and a part of Lodeynopolsky Uyezd in Olonets Governorate. In 1922, Olonets Governorate was abolished and Lodeynopolsky Uyezd was transferred to Petrograd Governorate (later Leningrad Oblast).
On August 1, 1927, the uyezds in Leningrad Oblast were abolished and Podporozhsky District with the administrative center in Podporozhye was established. It was a part of Lodeynoye Pole Okrug of Leningrad Oblast. In 1932, the administrative center of the district was moved to the selo of Vazhiny. In 1936, the construction of the Upper Svir Hydroelectric Station, launched in 1952, began. On July 5, 1937, Podporozhye was transformed into a work settlement and on September 11, 1937, the district's administrative center was moved back to Podroporozhye. Between 1941 and 1944, during World War II, Podporozhye was occupied by Finnish troops. On June 28, 1956, Podporozhye was granted town status.
Within the framework of administrative divisions, Podporozhye serves as the administrative center of Podporozhsky District. As an administrative division, it is, together with thirteen rural localities, incorporated within Podporozhsky District as Podporozhskoye Settlement Municipal Formation. As a municipal division, Podporozhskoye Settlement Municipal Formation is incorporated within Podporozhsky Municipal District as Podporozhskoye Urban Settlement.
There are enterprises of construction, as well as food industry, in Podporozhye. The Upper Svir Hydroelectric Station is located in Podporozhye.
The railway connecting St. Petersburg and Murmansk passes Podporozhye.
A paved road connecting Lodeynoye Pole with Vytegra in Vologda Oblast passes Podporozhye as well. There are also local roads.
The Svir River is navigable and is a part of the Volga–Baltic Waterway, connecting the basins of the Volga and the Neva Rivers. There is regular cruise and cargo traffic along the waterway.
The district contains two cultural heritage monuments of local significance, which are the Upper Svir Hydroelectric Station and a monument to soldiers fallen in World War II.
Podporozhye hosts the Podporozhye District Museum, which displays collections of local interest.
Podporozhye is twinned with:
 Steigen, NorwayЗаконодательное собрание Ленинградской области. Областной закон №32-оз от 15 июня 2010 г. «Об административно-территориальном устройстве Ленинградской области и порядке его изменения», в ред. Областного закона №23-оз от 8 мая 2014 г. «Об объединении муниципальных образований "Приморское городское поселение" Выборгского района Ленинградской области и "Глебычевское сельское поселение" Выборгского района Ленинградской области и о внесении изменений в отдельные Областные законы». Вступил в силу со дня официального опубликования. Опубликован: "Вести", №112, 23 июня 2010 г. (Legislative Assembly of Leningrad Oblast. Oblast Law #32-oz of June 15, 2010 On the Administrative-Territorial Structure of Leningrad Oblast and on the Procedures for Its Change, as amended by the Oblast Law #23-oz of May 8, 2014 On Merging the Municipal Formations of "Primorskoye Urban Settlement" in Vyborgsky District of Leningrad Oblast and "Glebychevskoye Rural Settlement" in Vyborgsky District of Leningrad Oblast and on Amending Various Oblast Laws. Effective as of the day of the official publication.).
Законодательное собрание Ленинградской области. Областной закон №51-оз от 1 сентября 2004 г. «Об установлении границ и наделении соответствующим статусом муниципального образования Подпорожский муниципальный район и муниципальных образований в его составе», в ред. Областного закона №17-оз от 6 мая 2010 г «О внесении изменений в некоторые областные законы в связи с принятием федерального закона "О внесении изменений в отдельные законодательные акты Российской Федерации в связи с совершенствованием организации местного самоуправления"». Вступил в силу через 10 дней со дня официального опубликования (24  сентября 2004 г.). Опубликован: "Вестник Правительства Ленинградской области", №27, 14 сентября 2004 г. (Legislative Assembly of Leningrad Oblast. Oblast Law #51-oz of September 1, 2004 On Establishing the Borders of and Granting an Appropriate Status to the Municipal Formation of Podporozhsky Municipal District and to the Municipal Formations Comprised By It, as amended by the Oblast Law #17-oz of May 6, 2010 On Amending Various Oblast Laws Due to the Adoption of the Federal Law "On Amending Various Legislative Acts of the Russian Federation Due to the Improvement of the Organization of the Local Self-Government". Effective as of after 10 days from the day of the official publication (September 24 2004).).