Taishō Democracy was a liberal and democratic trend across the political, economic, and cultural fields in Japan that began roughly after the Russo-Japanese War and continued until the end of the Taishō period (1912–1926). This trend was most evident in the field of politics, famously represented by the Taishō Democracy Movement (大正デモクラシー運動) and the establishment of the Seitō Naikaku System (政党内閣制), a representative democracy in which the party with a majority in parliament organizes the cabinet. The term "Taishō Democracy" has been widely used since the book "The History of Taishō Democracy (大正デモクラシー史, Taishō demokurashii Shi)" written by Shinobu Seizaburō.
Although there are many theories about when Taishō Democracy began and ended, 1905 is often said to be the starting year of the Democratic era. 1905 was the year when Bloody Sunday happened in Russia, which subsequently led to the Russian Revolution. The Bloody Sunday was instigated by the loss of faith in the Tsarist government as a result of public discontent with the results of the Russo-Japanese War. In other words, the contradiction between the burden on the workers and general populace and the remote and costly war against Japan contributed greatly to the public unrest which sparked the 1905 revolution. Meanwhile, a similar contradiction existed in Japan. During the war and even before the war, Japanese socialists stated that the war would need the sacrifice of the people. Heimin Shinbun pointed out on 14 February 1904 that "The people will suffer for a long time from taxation for the war.". Some Christians and women's liberationists expressed similar Anti-War attitudes.
The Russo-Japanese war ended in 1905, and the peace treaty was signed. Although Japan won, the general populace was disappointed by the result of the peace treaty. The Japanese people saw the peace treaty, which lacked major Russian territorial cessions and monetary reparations, as foreshadowing more sacrifice without benefits. Public anger toward the government gradually grew, and eventually led to the foundation of the movement against the Russo-Japanese war peace treaty.
There are many theories about the timing of the Taishō Democracy, but many historians agree that the following events are crucial to Taishō Democracy.
First of all, there was the Russo-Japanese War peace treaty protest movement and the Hibiya incendiary incident that accompanied it. The movement grew across the country and gradually exposed the people's dissatisfaction with their government. Over time, the movement transformed into the Movement to Protect Constitutional Government, and thereby the igniting the Taishō political crisis (大正政変). This was the first instance of a popular movement trying to replace the cabinet in Japanese history, and the Katsura cabinet collapsed only 53 days after its formation. The rice riots of 1918 (米騒動) and the establishment of the Hara Cabinet are considered to be a major milestone in Taisho democracy. When the rice riots subsided, the universal suffrage movement (普選運動) was in full swing and became a nationwide political movement. The general election law (普通選挙法) was enacted under the subsequent cabinet of Takaaki Kato (加藤高明). In 1932, Rikken Seiyūkai (政友会), Kenseikai (憲政会), Kakushin Club (革新倶楽部) launched a campaign to overthrow Kiyoura Keigo's cabinet. The campaign grew into what came to be called the Second Constitutional Movement (第二次護憲運動).
Minpon Shugi is one form of democracy based on monarchical sovereignty that the political scientist Yoshino Sakuzo put forward in "Kensei no hongi o toite sono yushu no bi o nasu no michi o ronzu (憲政の本義を説いて其有終の美を済すの途を論ず)". According to this thesis, Minpon Shugi has two main points. First, it is "the policy in exercising political power of valuing the profit, happiness, and opinions of the people." Second, it demands that "in the final determination of policies, the people's opinions must be valued highly." In short, Minpon Shugi does not set the place of the sovereignty, and it can coexist with the monarchical system.
At that time, people criticize Minshu Shugi which is a democracy based on popular sovereignty because people were afraid of Minshu Shugi violating their monarchical system. Yoshino tried to change the image of democracy which is based on people's sovereignty (Minshu Shugi) to democracy which is based on monarchical sovereignty (Minpon Shugi) in order to fit "democracy" into Japanese society.
After the WWI, Minpon Shugi became the ideology of the Taishō Democracy Movement. Taishō Democracy Movement was by the activists who were affected by the Minpon Shugi what Yoshino advocated.
The Russo-Japanese War caused serious damage to Japan's finances. Japan used foreign debt to start the war. It is said that the reason why Japan barely won was that the Russian government preserved its main force for fear of revolution. Japan was plagued by Russian machine guns and had covered all over with the wounds. The peace treaty offered by U.S. President Roosevelt achieved "more than expected," said a government-leaning newspaper at the time.
On the other hand, the public reaction was the exact opposite. The people had sacrificed a great deal for the Russo-Japanese War. The government imposed higher taxes on the citizens to pay for the war, and the peasants had to pay most of their profits in taxes. The tax also dealt a blow to small and medium-sized businesses, and even during the war, the nation's silk cloth manufacturers' associations, wholesale brokers representatives of the union, and the retail trade association came to Tokyo to oppose it. The same behavior was also observed for the salt monopoly. Thus, dissatisfaction with the war grew from rural areas across the country to urban areas.
The universal trend of democracy and independence from the nation can be said as products of Taishō Democracy. It can be seen in various fields at that time as below:
People became to have more opinions about the nation's decisions. It means people became thinking themselves more independent of the nation and tried to express their opinions with political power. Political movements such as launching party and universal suffrage are one of the appearances of it.
The tendency of independence of the capital occurred and people sought to be free from the regulations. In other words, people demanded a limited government. As a result, the power of capitalists or finance experts got stronger than before. Moreover, people began the movement of abolition of tax and claimed a disarmament.
The independence of education was also advocated, and the values of education itself have self-purpose were the reasons for it. In the sense, the authorities of universities and publications became independent with the nation, and people became able to express non-national opinions. Moreover, the increase in literacy rate allowed people to read more books and get more information.
The social system of Patriarchy still existed in Japan at that time; however, there had been a change to the traditional women's position gradually. Itō Noe who was a feminist and editor of a magazine criticized that women not having equal rights as men. These women's activists such as Itō Noe, Hiratsuka Raichō, and Yoshiya Nobuko tried to make changes to the male privilege system and aim for the independence of women.
Keishichi Hirasawa [ja] (平澤計七)
Senji Yamamoto [ja] (山本宣治)
Takiji Kobayashi (小林多喜二)
Hiratsuka Raichō (平塚らいてう)
Itō Noe (伊藤野枝)
Yoshiya Nobuko (吉屋信子)
Woman's suffrage (女性参政権)
Minpon Shugi (民本主義)
Universal suffrage
Freedom and People's Rights Movement (自由民権運動)
Hanshinkan Modernismhttps://www.facinghistory.org/nanjing-atrocities/nation-building/taisho-democracy-japan-1912-1926
https://www.japantimes.co.jp/life/2012/07/29/general/taisho-democracy-pays-the-ultimate-price/#.XulryUX7Ryw