South West Tasmania is a region in Tasmania that has evoked curiosity as to its resources over the duration of European presence on the island.
The more recent is the consideration as a potential area of resources for development and its consideration as World Heritage wilderness.
The most notable controversies occurring in the region in the late twentieth century was the flooding of Lake Pedder and the proposed damming of the Franklin River by the Franklin Dam.
Southwest is a locality that covers most of the region. The locality (and therefore the region) is in the local government areas of Derwent Valley (29%), Huon Valley (20%), Central Highlands (7%) and West Coast (44%). Its central point, near the encircled locality of Strathgordon, is about 116 kilometres (72 mi) west of the town of New Norfolk, the administrative centre for the Derwent Valley Council. The 2016 census has a population of 15 for the state suburb of Southwest.
Most early walks through the region were for discovery, or in the case of Thomas Bather Moore was to establish tracks for access.
In 1927, a walk through the area between Cox Bight and Bathurst Harbour even included the then governor of the state, Sir James O'Grady, and its intention was a search for geological information.
The Southern Ocean forms the western and southern boundaries. The locality encircles Strathgordon, and is adjoined by the localities of Macquarie Heads, Strahan, West Coast, Queenstown, Gormanston, Lake St Clair, Derwent Bridge, Butlers Gorge, Tarraleah, Wayatinah, Florentine, Maydena, Styx, Lonnavale, Geeveston, Raminea, Strathblane, Hastings, Lune River, and Recherche.
The A10 route (Lyell Highway) enters from Derwent Bridge in the north-east and runs generally north-west until it reaches the north-western boundary, where it exits to Queenstown. Route B61 (Gordon River Road) enters from Maydena in the east and runs generally west through Strathgordon to the Gordon Dam, where it ends. Route C607 (Scotts Peak Dam Road) starts at an intersection with B61 and runs south and west to Scotts Peak Dam, where it ends.
Members were Sir George B Cartland, G. J. Foot and A. G. Ogilvie. 
Submissions were received on its subject area.
It made a preliminary report in May 1976, and a final report in August 1978.
Following national and international concern over the fate of South West Tasmania, Commonwealth Government funded the survey with the States Grants (Nature Conservation Act) Act of 1974. Further funding was provided from the Environment (Financial Assistance) Act of 1977.
The South West Tasmania Resources Survey produced 25 Discussion Papers, 22 Working Papers and 20 Occasional papers - including the breakup of the region into river catchments:
Franklin River
Picton River
Huon Weld
Lake Gordon–Lake Pedder
Lower Gordon
Macquarie Harbour
King River
Mackintosh-Murchison
Wanderer and Giblin
Davey River
Bathurst Harbour
New River and South CoastTen years after the South West Resources survey the Australia Heritage Commission published an inventory for the South West.
South West Wilderness
Regions of Tasmania
MelaleucaGee, H.; Fenton, J., eds. (1978). The South West Book – A Tasmanian Wilderness. Melbourne: Australian Conservation Foundation. ISBN 0-85802-054-8.
"Special Issue – The Wonderful South-West". Habitat. Australian Conservation Foundation. 3 (2). June–July 1975.
Lines, William J. (2006). Patriots: defending Australia's natural heritage. St. Lucia, Qld.: University of Queensland Press. ISBN 0-7022-3554-7.
Neilson, D. (1975). South West Tasmania – A land of the Wild. Adelaide: Rigby. ISBN 0-85179-874-8.
