The following is a list of gods, goddesses and many other divine and semi-divine figures from ancient Greek mythology and ancient Greek religion.
The Greeks created images of their deities for many purposes. A temple would house the statue of a god or goddess, or multiple deities, and might be decorated with relief scenes depicting myths. Divine images were common on coins. Drinking cups and other vessels were painted with scenes from Greek myths.
The Titan gods and goddesses are depicted in Greek art less commonly than the Olympians.
The Gigantes were the offspring of Gaia (Earth), born from the blood that fell when Uranus (Sky) was castrated by their Titan son Cronus, who fought the Gigantomachy, their war with the Olympian gods for supremacy of the cosmos, they include:
Alcyoneus (Ἀλκυονεύς), a giant usually considered to be one of the Gigantes, slain by Heracles.
Chthonius (Χθόνιος).
Damysus (Δάμυσος), the fastest of all the Giants in the Greek mythology.
Enceladus (Ἐγκέλαδος), typically slain by Athena, said to be buried under Mount Etna in Sicily.
Mimas (Μίμας), according to Apollodorus, he was killed by Hephaestus, or by others Zeus or Ares.
Pallas (Πάλλας), according to Apollodorus, he was flayed by Athena, who used his skin as a shield.
Picolous (Πικόλοος), who fled the battle but was slain by Helios.
Polybotes (Πολυβώτης), typically slain by Poseidon.
Porphyrion (Πορφυρίων), one of the leaders of the Gigantes, typically slain by Zeus.
Thoas/Thoon (Θόων), he was killed by the Moirai.For a more complete list of Gigantes see Giants (Greek mythology)#Named Giants.
Aloadae (Ἀλῳάδαι), twin giants who attempted to climb to Olympus by piling mountains on top of each other.
Otus or Otos (Ότος).
Ephialtes (Εφιάλτης).
Anax (Αναξ) was a giant of the island of Lade near Miletos in Lydia, Anatolia.
Antaeus (Ἀνταῖος), a Libyan giant who wrestled all visitors to the death until he was slain by Heracles.
Antiphates (Ἀντιφάτης), the king of the man-eating giants known as Laestrygones which were encountered by Odysseus on his travels.
Argus Panoptes (Ἄργος Πανόπτης), a hundred-eyed giant tasked with guarding Io.
Asterius (Αστεριος), a Lydian giant.
Cacus (Κακος), a fire-breathing Latin giant slain by Heracles.
Cyclopes (Hesiodic), three one-eyed giants who forged the lightning-bolts of Zeus, Trident of Poseidon and Helmet of Hades.
Arges (Ἄργης).
Brontes (Βρόντης).
Steropes (Στερόπης).
Cyclopes (Homeric), a tribe of one-eyed, man-eating giants who herded flocks of sheep on the island of Sicily.
Polyphemus (Πολύφημος), a Cyclops who briefly captured Odysseus and his men, only to be overcome and blinded by the hero.
The Gegenees (Γηγενέες), a tribe of six-armed giants fought by the Argonauts on Bear Mountain in Mysia.
Geryon (Γηρυων), a three-bodied giant who dwelt on the sunset isle at the ends of the earth. He was slain by Heracles when the hero arrived to fetch the giant's cattle as one of his twelve labours.
The Hekatoncheires (Ἑκατόγχειρες), or Centimanes (Latin), the Hundred-Handed Ones, giant gods of violent storms and hurricanes. Three sons of Uranus and Gaia, each with his own distinct characters.
Briareus (Βριάρεως) or Aigaion (Αἰγαίων), The Vigorous.
Cottus (Κόττος), The Furious.
Gyges (Γύγης), The Big-Limbed.
The Laestrygonians (Λαιστρυγόνες), a tribe of man-eating giants encountered by Odysseus on his travels.
Orion (Ὠρίων), a giant huntsman whom Zeus placed among the stars as the constellation of Orion.
Talos (Τάλως), a giant forged from bronze by Hephaestus, and given by Zeus to his lover Europa as her personal protector.
Tityos (Τίτυος), a giant slain by Apollo and Artemis when he attempted to violate their mother Leto.
Typhon (Τυφῶν), a monstrous immortal storm-giant who attempted to launch an attack on Mount Olympus but was defeated by the Olympians and imprisoned in the pits of Tartarus.

 Eros
 Hermes watches Hypnos and Thanatos carry the dead Sarpedon from the battlefield at Troy (Euphronios Krater)
Charites (Χάριτες), goddesses of charm, beauty, nature, human creativity, and fertility
Aglaea (Αγλαΐα), goddess of beauty, adornment, splendor and glory
Euphrosyne (Εὐφροσύνη), goddess of good cheer, joy, mirth, and merriment
Thalia (Θάλεια), goddess of festive celebrations and rich and luxurious banquets
Hegemone (Ηγεμόνη) "mastery"
Antheia (Άνθεια), goddess of flowers and flowery wreaths
Pasithea (Πασιθέα), goddess of rest and relaxation
Cleta (Κλήτα) "the glorious"
Phaenna (Φαέννα) "the shining"
Eudaimonia (Ευδαιμονία) "happiness"
Euthymia (Ευθυμία) "good mood"
Calleis (Καλλείς) "beauty"
Paidia (Παιδία) "play, amusement"
Pandaisia (Πανδαισία) "banquet for everyone"
Pannychis (Παννυχίς) "all-night (festivity)"The Horae (Ώρες), The Hours, the goddesses of natural order
Eunomia (Ευνομία), spirit of good order, and springtime goddess of green pastures
Dike (Δίκη), spirit of justice, may have represented springtime growth
Eirene (Ειρήνη), spirit of peace and goddess of the springtime
The goddesses of springtime growth
Thallo (Θαλλώ), goddess of spring buds and shoots, identified with Eirene
Auxo (Αυξώ), goddess of spring growth
Karpo (Καρπώ), goddess of the fruits of the earth
The goddesses of welfare
Pherousa (Φέρουσα) "the bringer"
Euporie (Ευπορίη) "abundance"
Orthosie (Ορθοσίη) "prosperity"
The goddesses of the natural portions of time and the times of day
Auge (Αυγή), first light of the morning
Anatole (Ανατολή) or Anatolia (Ανατολία), sunrise
Mousika or Musica (Μουσική), the morning hour of music and study
Gymnastika, Gymnastica (Γυμναστίκή) or Gymnasia (Γυμνασία), the morning hour of gymnastics/exercise
Nymphe (Νυμφή), the morning hour of ablutions (bathing, washing)
Mesembria (Μεσημβρία), noon
Sponde (Σπονδή), libations poured after lunch
Elete, prayer, the first of the afternoon work hours
Akte, Acte (Ακτή) or Cypris (Κυπρίς), eating and pleasure, the second of the afternoon work hours
Hesperis (Έσπερίς), evening
Dysis (Δύσις), sunset
Arktos (Άρκτος), night sky, constellation
The goddesses of seasons of the year
Eiar (Είαρ), spring
Theros (Θέρος), summer
Pthinoporon (Φθινόπωρον), autumn
Cheimon (Χειμών), winterThe Danaides, forty-nine daughters of Danaus who murdered their husbands and were condemned to an eternity of carrying water in leaky jugs
Ixion, a king of the Lapiths who attempted to rape Hera and was bound to a flaming wheel in Tartarus
Sisyphus, a king of Thessaly who attempted to cheat death and was sentenced to an eternity of rolling a boulder up a hill, only to watch it roll back down
Tantalus, a king of Anatolia who butchered his son Pelops and served him as a meal to the gods; he was punished with the torment of starvation, food and drink eternally dangling just out of reachSee List of minor Greek mythological figuresClassical mythology
Family tree of the Greek gods
List of deities
List of Greek mythological creatures
List of Mycenaean deities
List of Philippine mythological figures
List of Philippine mythological creatures
List of Roman deities
List of Trojan War characters
List of Greek Deities Media related to Characters in Greek mythology at Wikimedia Commons