Wyandotte County (/ˈwaɪ.əndɒt/; county code WY) is a county in the U.S. state of Kansas. As of the 2020 census, the population was 169,245, making it Kansas's fourth-most populous county. Its county seat and most populous city is Kansas City, with which it shares a unified government. Wyandotte County is directly north of Johnson County, Kansas, and west of Kansas City, Missouri.
The county is named after the Wyandot (also known as Wyandott or Wyandotte) Indians. They were called the Huron by the French in Canada, but called themselves Wendat. They were distantly related to the Iroquois, with whom they sometimes fought. They had hoped to keep white Americans out of their territory and to make the Ohio River the border between the United States and Canada.
One branch of the Wyandot moved to the area that is now the state of Ohio. They generally took the course of assimilation into Anglo-American society. Many of them embraced Christianity under the influence of missionaries. They were transported to the current Wyandotte County in 1843, where they set up a community and worked in cooperation with Anglo settlers. The Christian Munsee also influenced this area's early settlement.
The Wyandot in Kansas set up a constitutional form of government they had devised in Ohio. They set up the territorial government for Kansas and Nebraska, and elected one of their own territorial governor.
The county was organized in 1859. Tenskwatawa (Tecumseh's brother), "the Prophet", fought at the Battle of Tippecanoe in 1811. He was buried at Shawnee Native American historical site Whitefeather Spring, at 3818 Ruby Ave.  Kansas City, which was added in 1975 to the National Register of Historic Places in 1975. The Kansas City Smelting and Refining Company employed over 250 men during the 1880s. The ore and base bullion is received from the mountains' mining districts and is crushed, separated and refined.
The Delaware Crossing (or "Military Crossing"; sometimes "the Secondine") was where the old Indian trail met the waters of the Kaw River. Circa 1831, Moses Grinter, one of the area's earliest permanent white settlers, set up the Grinter Ferry on the Kansas River there. His house was known as the Grinter Place. The ferry was used by traders, freighters, and soldiers traveling between Fort Leavenworth and Fort Scott on the military road. Others crossed this area on their way to Santa Fe.
The Diocese of Leavenworth moved its see from Leavenworth, Kansas to Kansas City, Kansas on 10 May 1947. It became an archdiocese on 9 August 1952.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has an area of 156 square miles (400 km), of which 152 square miles (390 km) is land and 4.6 square miles (12 km) (2.9%) is water. It is Kansas's smallest county by area.
The county's natural topography consists of gently rolling terrain. The Kansas River forms part of the county's southern boundary. The elevation generally increases from south to north as the distance from the Kansas River and Missouri River increases.
The county is drained by the watersheds of the Kansas River, which is part of the Missouri River watershed. It receives plentiful rainfall.
Platte County, Missouri (north)
Clay County, Missouri (northeast)
Jackson County, Missouri (east)
Johnson County (south)
Leavenworth County (west)Wyandotte County is included in the Kansas City, MO-KS Metropolitan Statistical Area.
Wyandotte County's population was estimated at 163,369 in 2015, an increase of 5,864, or 3.0%, over the previous five years; it is Kansas's fourth-most populous county.
As of the 2000 census, there were 157,882 people, 59,700 households, and 39,163 families residing in the county. The population density was 1,043 people per square mile (403/km). There were 65,892 housing units at an average density of 435 per square mile (168/km). The racial makeup of the county was 58.18% White, 28.33% Black or African American, 1.63% Asian, 0.74% Native American, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 8.17% from other races, and 2.91% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 16.00% of the population.
By 2007, 48.1% of Wyandotte County's population was non-Hispanic whites. 26.3% of the population was African-American. Native Americans made up 0.6% of the population, Asians 1.8%, and Latinos 21.7%.
There were 59,700 households, of which 32.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.10% were married couples living together, 17.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.40% were non-families. 28.90% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.62 and the average family size was 3.24.
In the county, the population was spread out, with 28.50% under the age of 18, 10.40% from 18 to 24, 29.50% from 25 to 44, 19.90% from 45 to 64, and 11.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32. For every 100 females there were 95.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.3 males.
The median income for a household in the county was $33,784, and the median income for a family was $40,333. Males had a median income of $31,335 versus $24,640 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,005. About 12.5% of families and 16.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 23% of those under age 18 and 11.1% of those 65 or older.
Approximately 1.4% of the county's residents take public transportation to work. This is the highest percentage in the state.
The Kansas City Police Department also serves Wyandotte County.
Wyandotte County was a prohibition, or "dry", county until the Kansas Constitution was amended in 1986 and voters approved the sale of liquor by the individual drink with a 30% food sales requirement. Voters removed the food sales requirement in 1988.

Unlike almost every other county in Kansas, Wyandotte County has been solidly Democratic ever since the New Deal. This is largely due to its highly urbanized nature and significant minority population. The only Democrat to lose Wyandotte County since 1932 has been George McGovern in Richard Nixon’s 49-state landslide of 1972, when Nixon swept all 275 counties in Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska. Wyandotte was the only county in Kansas to vote for Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1944, Adlai Stevenson II in both 1952 and 1956, Hubert Humphrey in 1968, Jimmy Carter in 1980, and Walter Mondale in 1984. No Republican presidential nominee has managed even 40% of the vote since Ronald Reagan in 1984.
Village West, at the intersection of Interstates 70 and 435, has significantly fueled growth in KCK and Wyandotte County. Anchored by the Kansas Speedway, its attractions and retailers include Hollywood Casino, Legends Outlets Kansas City, Schlitterbahn Vacation Village, Cabela's, Nebraska Furniture Mart, Great Wolf Lodge, Legends Field (Kansas City) (home to the Kansas City Monarchs (American Association) of the American Association) and Children's Mercy Park (home of Sporting Kansas City of Major League Soccer).
Also in the area are Azura Amphitheater (commonly known as the Sandstone Amphitheater), the National Agricultural Center and Hall of Fame, Wyandotte County Park, and Sunflower Hills Golf Course.
==
H C==Education & Athletics==
 
Public
Kansas City Kansas Community College
University of Kansas Medical CenterPrivate
Donnelly CollegeTurner USD 202
Piper USD 203
Bonner Springs–Edwardsville USD 204
Kansas City USD 500Primary
Resurrection Grade School (formerly St. Peter's Cathedral Grade School)
St. Patrick's Grade School
Christ the King Grade SchoolSecondary
Bishop Ward High SchoolKansas State School for the Blind (KSSB) == ==In the past 10 years there has been a surge of not only prominent athletes from Wyandotte County, but also prominent coaches. "WyCo" has always been known for its successful athletes but is just starting to get recognition for the amazing coaches that it has produced. 
Derrick Estelle-Founder of the KC Blue Dogs is seen as the Father of Wyandotte County athletics. Having coached football and basketball for over 20 years, not many athletes from the city can say that they haven't played under Coach Derrick. He is known for his faith based leadership and quick thinking. Derrick has been a mentor to many coaches and has been known to give his 'stamp' of approval to those deserving. After a brief break to rebrand, Derrick has continued the Blue Dogs program and will also be coaching Football and Basketbll at Eisenhower Middle School.
Eric King-Before retiring with the Topeka High Trojans, Coach King spent 15 years as the Head Boys Basketball Coach for Washington Hgin School.  He and his boys have won nine league championships and been to the state tournament around 7 times. King also serves on the summer coaching staff for the University of Kansas. Coach King is known for his passionate coaching style and his trademark sayings "Get to class" and "C'mon fellas". King is currently retired but still works as a P.E teacher at Topeka High.
Deon Whitten-Has the most extensive coaching record of any coach in Wyandotte County, having coached semi pro, little league, and everything in between. Whitten is known for his honest opinions and ability to bring talent out of any athlete. One of his biggest accomplishments is having a hand in coaching and guiding New York Jets running back, Breece Hall.  Whitten is known for his use curse words and brutal honesty when coaching and is one of the biggest community figures in the city. He is currently on the football coaching staff at Bishop Ward HS.
Bruce Brooks- Co-Founder of the Rise and Grind Basketball Club LLC,  Coach Brooks has helped pave the way for many young athletes. Currently on the  basketball coaching staff for the Olathe Northwest Boys Basketball program, Bruce is still heavily involced in WyCo athletics and is a mentor to those that he coaches through his AAU program and to those that he coached while at Harmon HS. Known for his passionate and energetic coaching style, Bruce had always been one to advocate for his players on and off the court.
David Gonzales-Before taking on the Head Coach job at Olathe Northwest, Coach "Gonzo" was a force to be reckoned with at Harmon HS. Becoming the Head Coach in 2010, he created a program that was known for its consistent success. Since 2010 his team has played in the 5A state championship game in year 2, got bumped up to 6A and immediately went to two straight 6A state tournaments, and then in 2022 they won ther 4th straight KCAL championship, becoming  35-3 in league and 20-0 at home during that span. This is just a fraction of the teams accolades. Although Gonzo is now at Olathe NW, his love for the city stil runs deep.
Fred Hooks-Having the only program to ever rival Derrick Estelle's, Coach Hooks roots run deep  through WyCo. Having founded the "59ers" basketball program, Hooks is responsible for making "AAU ball" popular for elementary school kids. Hooks focuses purely on the basketball development of young children and likes to 'stay in his lane". Although he has never coached for a formal program, his coaching knowledge is something that is heavily admired in the city.
Kendon McClaine II- An introverted individual who is on track to have success at a very high level. Although being the youngest coach on this list, McClaine has the ability to command a room in the calmest way possible. Known for his nonchalant but fundamentally based coaching style, McClaine has been a big help in developing the skills of younger athletes and refining the skills of older athletes in the city. McClaine coaches both Basketball and Football and it is believed that they are his heart and soul. Having success on the Middle School, High School, and AAU level,  he will continue to be a positive role model for everyone that comes in contact with him. Utilizing social media as one of his many resources for communication , McClaine has been able to build his contact list of college coaches to help provide  athletes with every opportunity available. This year he will be on the football coaching staff for Bishop Ward HS, and  is one of the head figures for the Rise & Grind Basketball Club LLC. It is unknown who he will coach High School basketball for this year.Kansas City
Bonner Springs (partly in Leavenworth and Johnson counties)
Edwardsville
Lake Quivira (partly in Johnson County)Wyandotte County has a single township. The cities of Bonner Springs, Kansas City, and Lake Quivira are considered governmentally independent and excluded from the township's census. In the following table, the population center is the largest city (or cities) included in that township's population total, if it is of significant size.
The 2010 census lists the city of Edwardsville as also governmentally independent, with the size of the remaining township dropping to a population of 31 living on 2.43 sq mi of land (and 0.36 sq mi water), resulting in a population density of 12.76/sq mi (4.93 / km). The Kansas State Historical Society also confirms Edwardsville's departure.
National Register of Historic Places listings in Wyandotte County, Kansas



Community information for Kansas
Kansas locations by per capita income
List of counties in Kansas
List of townships in Kansas
List of cities in Kansas
List of unincorporated communities in Kansas
List of ghost towns in Kansas




Education information for Kansas
List of colleges and universities in Kansas
List of high schools in Kansas
List of unified school districts in Kansas
Historical information for Kansas
List of museums in Kansas
National Register of Historic Places listings in Kansas


NotesHistoric Preservation.  Kansas City, Kansas, Urban Planning & Land Use
Sween, Argentine Pictures. Interactive Genealogy.  Pictorial History of Wyandotte County, KS.
Historical Wyandotte County. Kansas Heritage, Kansas Community Network.
Views of the Past.  Kansas City, Kansas Bicentennial Commission.
Sween, Bonner Springs and Edwardsville. Virtual Bonner Springs, KS.
Kansas City, Kansas; Joe H. Vaughan; Arcadia Publishing; 2012; ISBN 978-0-7385-9399-9.
Tuttle and Pike's Atlas of Kansas City, Kansas; Tuttle & Pike; 13 pages; 1907.
Complete Set of Surveys and Plats or Properties in Wyandotte County and Kansas City Kansas; G.M. Hopkins & Co; 51 pages; 1887.CountyWyandotte County - Official Website
Wyandotte County - Directory of Public OfficialsOtherKansas City / Wyandotte County Convention and Visitors Bureau
Wyandotte County Economic Development CouncilHistoricalWyandotte County Kansas History and Heritage ProjectMapsWyandotte County maps: Current, Historic, KDOT
Kansas Highway maps: Current, Historic, KDOT
Kansas Railroad maps: Current, 1996, 1915, KDOT and Kansas Historical SocietyCoordinates: 39°07′N 94°43′W﻿ / ﻿39.117°N 94.717°W﻿ / 39.117; -94.717
