The Double, in association football, is the achievement of winning a country's top tier division and its primary cup competition in the same season. The lists in this article examine this definition of a double, while derivative sections examine much less frequent, continental instances. The Double can also mean beating a team both home and away in the same league season, a feat often noted as doing the double over a particular opponent.
The first club to achieve a double was Preston North End in 1889, winning the FA Cup and The Football League in the inaugural season of the league.
The team that holds the record for the most doubles is Linfield of Northern Ireland, with a total of 25.
In Albania, five teams have won the Double of the Kategoria Superiore and the Kupa e Shqipërisë.
In Andorra, four teams have won the Double of the Primera Divisió and the Copa Constitució.
Prior to the breakup of the Soviet Union, Armenian clubs were part of Soviet competition. Ararat Yerevan was one of just two non-Russian clubs to win the Soviet double, in 1973, with Nikita Simonyan at the helm. They also won the post-independence Armenian Double in 1993.
In Armenia, four teams have won the Double of the Soviet Top League/Armenian Premier League and the Soviet Cup/Armenian Independence Cup.
In Austria, nine teams have won the Double of the Austrian Bundesliga and the Austrian Cup.
In Azerbaijan, four teams have won the Double of the Azerbaijan Premier League and the Azerbaijan Cup.
In Belarus, four teams have won the Double of the Belarusian Premier League and the Belarusian Cup.
In Belgium, four teams have won the Double of the Belgian First Division A and the Belgian Cup.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, three teams have won the Double of the First League of Bosnia and Herzegovina/Premier League of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Football Cup.
In Bulgaria, four teams have won the Double of the Bulgarian A Football Group and the Bulgarian Cup.
In Croatia, three teams have won the Double of the Yugoslav First League/Croatian First Football League and the Yugoslav Cup/Croatian Football Cup.
In Cyprus, five teams have won the Double of the Cypriot First Division and the Cypriot Cup.
Two teams won the Double of the Czechoslovak First League and Czechoslovak Cup. Since the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993, the Double has consisted of the Czech First League and Czech Cup, being won by only two teams to date.
In Denmark, five teams have won the Double of the Danish Superliga and the Danish Cup.
In England, eight teams have won the double of the Football League First Division (1888–1992)/Premier League (1992–present) and FA Cup.
Preston North End in 1889 won the double without losing a game all season.
Manchester United won the double three times in the 1990s, including as part of a continental treble in 1998–99.
Manchester City won the double as part of the first-ever domestic treble for an English men's football team in 2018–19.In Estonia, two teams have won the Double of the Meistriliiga and the Estonian Cup.
In Faroe Islands, six teams have won the Double of the Faroe Islands Premier League and the Faroe Islands Cup.
In Finland, three teams have won the Double of the Veikkausliiga and the Finnish Cup.
In France, 12 teams have won the Double of the Ligue 1 and the Coupe de France.
In Georgia, two teams have won the Double of the Georgian Premier League and the Georgian Cup.
A national cup competition was introduced in Germany in 1935, and was known as the Tschammer-Pokal for the country's then minister of sport. Between 1935 and the suspension of cup play in 1944 because of World War II, the Double was won only once.
Schalke 04 – 1937Play for what had become the DFB-Pokal was resumed following the war in 1953, and up until well after the formation of the Bundesliga in 1963, no club was able to complete the double. A new cup trophy was introduced as it was felt the previous one was associated with the Nazi period.
In the modern-day Bundesliga era, the double has been won by only four clubs. Bayern Munich holds the record, with 13.
Note: Bayern Munich's 2013 and 2020 Doubles were part of the club's Trebles which also included their UEFA Champions League victories.
Following World War II, a separate football competition emerged in the Russian-occupied eastern area of Germany.
The first division DDR-Oberliga was active from 1947–48 to 1990–91 (not held 1960–61) and saw the introduction of the FDGB-Pokal in 1949. The cup competition was not staged in 1950–51, 1952–53 and 1960–61. Five doubles were won in East German competition:
Dynamo Dresden (3) – 1971, 1977, 1990
BFC Dynamo – 1988
Hansa Rostock – 1991Since the reunification of Germany, no former East German club has won either the Bundesliga title nor the DFB-Pokal, and as of 2014, none of these former double winners is competing in the top tier.
In Gibraltar, seven teams have won the Double of the Gibraltar Premier Division and the Rock Cup.
In Greece, the big three of Attica and PAOK have managed to win the double of the Superleague Greece and the Greek Cup.
In Hungary, five teams have won the Double of the Nemzeti Bajnokság I and the Magyar Kupa.
In Iceland, five teams have won the Double of the Úrvalsdeild karla and the Icelandic Cup.
In Ireland, the double is achieved by winning the League of Ireland and FAI Cup. Bohemians managed a similar feat in 1928 season by winning the League, FAI Cup, the League of Ireland Shield and the Leinster Senior Cup. Derry City FC completed 'The Treble' in 1988–89 by also winning the League of Ireland Cup.
In Israel, the Double can be achieved by winning the Top division championship and the Israel State Cup. The team that has won the most doubles to date is Maccabi Tel Aviv, with seven wins, followed by their city rivals, Hapoel Tel Aviv with four wins. A total of fifteen doubles have been won.
Five Italian clubs share eleven doubles of the Serie A championship and the Coppa Italia.
Note: In 2006, Inter finished third in Serie A but were awarded the title as the highest placed club not to be involved in Calciopoli. The club's 2010 double was made the Treble with their UEFA Champions League victory.
In Kazakhstan, five teams have won the Double of the Kazakhstan Premier League and the Kazakhstan Cup.
In Kosovo, four teams have won the Double of the Superleague (1999–present) and the Kosovar Cup (1999–present).
In Latvia, three teams have won the Double of the Latvian Higher League and the Latvian Football Cup.
There is no national league in Liechtenstein, as its clubs partake in the neighbouring Swiss football league system; the Liechtenstein Football Cup is the only national football competition in the country.
In Lithuania six teams have won the Double of the A Lyga and the Lithuanian Football Cup.
Note: Žalgiris won domestic cup twice in 2016, due to format change.
In Luxembourgian football, the Double is made up of the National Division title and the Luxembourg Cup. As there are no other senior football competitions in the country, and no club have never come close to winning any European tournament, the Double is the ultimate achievement for a Luxembourgian club in one season.
The most successful clubs are Jeunesse Esch and F91 Dudelange, who have completed eight Doubles each.
In Malta, six teams have won the Double of the Maltese Premier League and the Maltese FA Trophy.
Sheriff Tiraspol were only founded in 1997, but have come to dominate the Moldovan game, winning every title from 2001 to 2010 inclusive. Seven of these were double wins (Moldovan National Division and Moldovan Cup). Sheriff, however, have never won the Moldovan Super Cup in any of their Double-winning years, though one reason for this was the Super Cup was not played in 2009 and 2010. One other club, Zimbru Chișinău, has won the double, in 1998.
In Montenegro, only two teams have won the Double of the Montenegrin First League and the Montenegrin Cup.
In the Netherlands, six teams have won the Double of the Eredivisie and the KNVB Cup.
Note: Ajax's 1972 Double were part of the club's Treble which also included their European Cup victory.
Note: PSV's 1988 Double were part of the club's Treble which also included their European Cup victory.
In Northern Ireland, seven teams have won the Double of the Irish League/Premier League/Premiership and the Irish Cup.
In North Macedonia, five teams have won the Double of the Macedonian First Football League and the Macedonian Football Cup.
In Norway, seven teams have won the Double of the Eliteserien and the Norwegian Football Cup.
In Poland, five teams have won the Double of the Ekstraklasa and the Polish Cup.
Until now, Legia Warsaw is the only team to achieve Domestic Treble by winning the two trophies and the Polish SuperCup title.
In Portugal, the Double is called "Dobradinha" and is achieved by winning the Primeira Liga and the Taça de Portugal. Only the "Big Three" have done so since the nationwide round-robin league competition was introduced in 1934.
Benfica holds the record of eleven Doubles. Sporting CP was the first side to achieve the Double, in 1941, and the most recent one was Porto, in 2022.
In Romania, the Double is called the Event and can be achieved by winning the Liga I and the Cupa României. The team that has won the most doubles to date is Steaua București, with nine wins, followed by their city rivals, Dinamo București with six wins. In recent times, CFR Cluj has won the Double twice, being the fourth non-Bucharest team to do so, after Universitatea Craiova, UTA Arad and Ripensia Timişoara.
Note: Steaua București initially won the double in 1987–88 but voluntarily gave up their Cupa României title.
Four Russian teams achieved the Double of the Soviet Top League and the USSR Cup in the former Soviet Union. The final Soviet championship was contested in 1991 and, following the break-up of the Soviet Union, newly independent states organised their own national competitions, with UEFA regarding the Russian Premier League and the Russian Cup as the respective successors to the old Soviet league and USSR Cup.
In San Marino six teams have won the Double of the Campionato Sammarinese di Calcio and the Coppa Titano.
Three teams have accomplished the double of the Scottish league championship and the Scottish Cup. Only Aberdeen have managed to break the Old Firm trend, during their stint of success in the 1980s.
Note: Celtic's 1967 Double was part of the club's Quintuple which also included their European Cup victory.
Two teams in the current Republic of Serbia have won the Double of the Yugoslav First League and Yugoslav Cup (1923–92), the First League of FR Yugoslavia/Serbia and Montenegro and FR Yugoslavia/Serbia and Montenegro Cup (1992–2006), and the Serbian SuperLiga and Serbian Cup (2006–present).
In Slovakia, seven teams have won the Double of the Czechoslovak First League/Slovak Super Liga and the Czechoslovak Cup/Slovak Cup.
In Slovenia, three teams have won the Double of the Slovenian PrvaLiga and the Slovenian Football Cup.
In Spain, four teams have won the Double (Doblete) of La Liga and the Copa del Rey.
Note: Barcelona's 2009 and 2015 Doubles were part of the club's Trebles which also included their UEFA Champions League victories.
In Sweden, six teams have won the Double of the Swedish championship and the Svenska Cupen.
The Svenska Cupen was not introduced until the 1941 season, while Allsvenskan started for the 1923–24 season. Svenska Cupen was also not played between 1954 and 1966. It should also be considered that winning Allsvenskan did not grant the title of Swedish champions until 1931 and between 1982 and 1992 when the title was given to the winner of other cup tournaments that were organized at the end of the league season. The number of doubles for IFK Göteborg and Malmö FF are affected by this. IFK Göteborg won the Swedish Championship together with Svenska Cupen in one additional season to the table below, they won the two titles in 1983, a year when they did not win Allsvenskan. Additionally while Malmö won Allsvenskan in 1989, they were not Swedish Championships for that season as they did not win the play-off following the ordinary league play. All other teams in the table below won the Swedish Championship in their double-winning seasons. The latest club to win a double is AIK who completed the feat in 2009. In 1982, IFK Göteborg also managed to combine its double with winning the UEFA Cup.
In Switzerland, eight teams have won the Double of the Swiss Super League and the Swiss Cup.
In Turkey, four teams have won the Double of the Süper Lig and the Turkish Cup.
Note: Galatasaray's 2000 Double was part of the club's Minor treble which also included their UEFA Cup victory.
Prior to the breakup of the Soviet Union, Ukrainian clubs were part of Soviet competition. Since 1992, the country has had its own domestic competition. Dynamo Kyiv has four Soviet and nine Ukrainian Doubles among its honours.
In Ukraine, two teams have won the Double of the Soviet Top League/Ukrainian Premier League and the Soviet Cup/Ukrainian Cup.
In Wales, seven teams have won the Double of the Division One (1904–92) / Welsh Premier League (1992–present) and the Welsh Cup.
Achieving this and also winning the Welsh League Cup would make a domestic Treble. To date, two clubs have achieved the Treble. Rhyl achieved a domestic quadruple in 2003–04, winning the Welsh Premier, Welsh Cup, Welsh Premier League Cup and North Wales Challenge Cup. They narrowly missed out on a clean sweep of five trophies losing the Welsh Premier Cup Final to Wrexham.
Rhyl's 2003/04 double was part of a domestic treble of Welsh Premier League, Welsh Cup and Welsh Premier League CupBoca Juniors are the only club to simultaneously win the Argentine Primera División and the Copa Argentina, doing so in 1969 and 2015.
Club Bolívar are the only club to complete the double having won both the Liga de Fútbol Profesional Boliviano and Copa Aerosur (defunct) in 2009.
Due to the large size of the country and the late development of the transportion and communication infrastructure needed to support it, a nationwide competition did not emerge until 1959. For 30 years, a domestic double was not possible since there existed only one national tournament. An exception was the 1967 season, when Palmeiras won the double consisting of the inaugural Torneio Roberto Gomes Pedrosa and the final edition of the Taça Brasil.
Since the founding of the Copa do Brasil in 1989, there has been two teams that one both the Copa do Brasil and the Campeonato Brasileiro Série A.
Two teams have won the Chilean double of the Chilean Primera División and Copa Chile.
Millonarios is the first Colombian club to win the double, taking both the Categoría Primera A and Copa Colombia in 1953 and 1963.
Nacional became the second club in Colombia winning the double, taking both the Categoría Primera A (Apertura and Clausura) and Copa Colombia in 2013.
Cup was made in 2019
In Paraguay, there is no national cup; the Paraguayan Primera División is the only national football competition in the country.
In Peru, there is no national cup; the Peruvian Primera División is the only national football competition in the country.
In Uruguay, three teams have won the Double of the Uruguayan Primera División and the Copa de Competencia (defunct).
To complete the double, a club must win the Venezuelan Primera División and the Copa Venezuela.
In Anguilla, there is no national cup; the Anguillan League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Antigua and Barbuda, two teams have won the Double of the Premier Division and the FA Cup.
In Aruba, two teams have won the Double of the Division di Honor and the Torneo Copa Betico Croes.
In the Bahamas, two teams have won the Double of the Senior League and the President's Cup.
In Barbados, seven teams have won the Double of the Barbados Premier Division and the Barbados FA Cup.
In Belize, there is no national cup, the Premier League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Bermuda, seven teams have won the Double of the Bermudian Premier Division and the Bermuda FA Cup.
In Bonaire, only one team has won the Double of the Bonaire League and the Kopa MCB.
There is no national cup in the British Virgin Islands, the BVIFA National Football League is the only national football competition in the country.
Top-level Canadian clubs either compete in the domestic Canadian Premier League (CPL), or Major League Soccer (MLS) of the United States. The Canadian Championship is the country's national cup and is contested between CPL teams, the three Canadian MLS teams, and the champions of the regional pro-am leagues.
For MLS teams, the Double may mean either the MLS Double, which is achieved by winning both the Supporters' Shield and the MLS Cup, or a league/cup Double of either the MLS Cup or Supporters' Shield, in addition to the Canadian Championship.
For CPL teams, a Double would include winning the CPL Championship and the Canadian Championship.
The 2017 Double achieved by Toronto FC was part of a Treble.
Five teams from the Cayman Islands have won the double of the Cayman Islands League and the Cayman Islands FA Cup.
In Costa Rica, no team has won the double of the Costa Rican Primera División and the Costa Rican Cup.
In Cuba, there is no national cup; the Campeonato Nacional is the only national football competition in the country.
In Curaçao, there is no national cup, the Curaçao League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Dominica, two teams have won the Double of the Dominica Premiere League and the Dominica Knock-Out Tournament (defunct).
In the Dominican Republic, there is no national cup; the Primera División is the only national football competition in the country.
In El Salvador, two teams have won the Double of the Primera División and the Copa El Salvador.
In French Guiana, four teams have won the Double of the French Guiana Championnat National and the Coupe de Guyane.
In Grenada, is no national cup, the Grenada League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Guadeloupe, six teams have won the Double of the Guadeloupe Division d'Honneur and the Coupe de Guadeloupe.
In Guatemala, three teams have won the Double of the Liga Nacional de Fútbol de Guatemala and the Copa de Guatemala (defunct).
In Guyana, only one team has won the Double of the National Super League and the Guyana Mayors Cup.
In Haiti, four teams have won the Double of the Ligue Haïtienne and the Coupe d'Haïti.
Club Deportivo Olimpia are the only club to complete the double having won both the Liga Nacional and Honduran Cup in 2015 respectively.
In Jamaica, three teams have won the Double of the National Premier League and the Champions Cup.
In Martinique, three teams have won the Double of the Martinique Championnat National and the Coupe de la Martinique.
In Mexico, nine teams have won the Double of the Primera Fuerza / Liga MX and the Copa MX.
In Montserrat, no team has won the Double of the Montserrat Championship and the Montserrat Cup.
In Nicaragua, two teams have won the Double of the Nicaraguan Primera División and the Copa de Nicaragua (defunct).
In Panama, no team has won the Double of the Liga Panameña and the Copa Panamá.
In Puerto Rico only one team has won the Double of the Liga Nacional and the Torneo de Copa (defunct).
In Saint Kitts and Nevis, four teams have won the Double of the Saint Kitts Premier Division and the Saint Kitts and Nevis National Cup.
And no team has won the Double of the Nevis Premier Division and the Saint Kitts and Nevis National Cup.
In Saint Lucia, two teams have won the Double of the Saint Lucia Gold Division and the Saint Lucia FA Cup.
In Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, is no national cup; the NLA Premier League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Sint Maarten, there is no national cup; the Sint Maarten League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Suriname, three teams have won the Double of the Topklasse and the Surinamese Cup.
In Trinidad and Tobago, 13 teams have won the Double of the Port of Spain Football League / National League / Semi-Professional League / TT Pro League and the Trinidad and Tobago Cup.
In Turks and Caicos Islands, is no national cup; the Provo Premier League is the only national football competition in the country.
In the United States, the Double consists of the MLS Cup and the U.S. Open Cup or Canadian Championship for United States and Canadian clubs, respectively. The Double may also be a combination of any of the domestic cups mentioned above and the CONCACAF Champions League. No team based in the United States has achieved the Treble of both MLS honours and a domestic cup in the same season although Toronto FC, who play in MLS but are based in Canada, won a Treble in 2017.
The following is a list of doubles in the United States in the MLS era:
There is no currently sanctioned National Cup in the United States for women, so the only way to achieve the Double in the United States is through a league double (winning the Shield or its equivalent for the best regular-season record, and the league championship).
The Women's United Soccer Association did not have formal recognition of the team with the best regular season record, but during the 2002 WUSA season, the Carolina Courage had the best regular season record and won the Founder's Cup, the WUSA Championship Trophy.
Women's Professional Soccer, which operated from 2009 to 2011, had one club win both the regular season championship and the WPS Championship (the latter through the playoffs): During the 2011 Women's Professional Soccer season, the Western New York Flash had the best regular season record, and won in the Championship match on 27 August 2011 to win the WPS Championship and the double.
The National Women's Soccer League did not see a double in its first five seasons (2013–2017). However, in both its 2018 and 2019 seasons, the North Carolina Courage won both the NWSL Shield (awarded to the team with the best regular-season record) and the NWSL Championship (earned by winning in the NWSL Playoffs).
In the United States Virgin Islands, there is no national cup; the U.S. Virgin Islands Championship is the only national football competition in the country.
From 1977 to 1997, the double could be achieved in Australia by winning the National Soccer League and the NSL Cup.
Between 1997 and 2014, Australia had no national cup competition so the traditional league and cup double could not be achieved. Since the formation of the A-League in 2004, a double could be accomplished by winning the Premiership in the regular league season and the Championship in the finals series. The feat of winning the minor premiership and the finals during the NSL era was not officially recognised as a 'double'.
From 2014–15, the FFA Cup takes place on an annual basis.
In American Samoa, two teams have won the Double of the FFAS Senior League and the FFAS President's Cup (defunct).

In Cook Islands, five teams have won the Double of the Cook Islands Round Cup and the Cook Islands Cup.
In Fiji, two teams have won the Double of the League Championship (for Districts) and the FFA Cup.
In New Caledonia, six teams have won the Double of the New Caledonia Super Ligue and the New Caledonia Cup.
Between 1970 and 2003, five New Zealand teams have won the double of the national championship (New Zealand National Soccer League (1970–92 and 2000–04), Superclub competition (1993–95), National Summer Soccer League (1996–98) or the New Zealand island soccer leagues National Final (1999)) and the Chatham Cup. From 1993 to 2003, the league champions were determined by a knockout tournament between the top-finishing teams at the end of the season, the team that finished in first place during the league phase of the season were not officially awarded a title.
From 2003, the league system in the country was drastically restructured and saw the National Soccer League disband, with its teams now competing on a regional basis. The New Zealand Football Championship was formed and became the country's national league, exclusively run for franchised teams as opposed to the traditional clubs that competed in the National Soccer League.
As with most franchise leagues, the Football Championship is split into two phases; the Premiership during the regular season and the Championship during the finals phase, which is contested between the top four-placed teams of the Premiership phase. The franchises are ineligible to participate in the Chatham Cup so the teams in the Football Championship don't have a cup competition to compete in.
In Palau, there is no national cup; the Palau Soccer League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Papua New Guinea, there is no national cup; the Papua New Guinea Overall Championship is the only national football competition in the country.
In Samoa, two teams have won the Double of the Samoa National League and the Samoa Cup.
In Solomon Islands, is no national cup; the Telekom S-League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Tahiti, nine teams have won the Double of the Tahiti First Division and the Tahiti Cup.
In Tonga, only one team has won the Double of the Tonga Major League and the Tonga Cup (defunct).
In Afghanistan, there are no national cups. The Afghan Premier League is the only national football competition in the country since 2012.
In Bahrain three teams have won the Double of the Bahraini Premier League and the Bahraini King's Cup.
In Bangladesh four teams have won the Double of the National Football Championship / Bangladesh Premier League and the Federation Cup.
Bhutan has no national cup, the Bhutan National League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Brunei, two teams have won the Double of the Brunei Premier League / Brunei Super League and the Brunei FA Cup.
In Cambodia only one team has won the Double of the Cambodian League and the Hun Sen Cup.
In China, three teams have won the Double of the Chinese Jia-A League / Chinese Super League and the Chinese FA Cup.
In Chinese Taipei, two teams have won the Double of the Enterprise Football League / Intercity Football League and the CTFA Cup.
Now in East Timor there is no national cup, the Super Liga Timorense is the only national football competition in the country.
In Guam two teams have won the Double of the Guam Men's Soccer League and the Guam FA Cup.
In Hong Kong, nine teams have won the Double of the Hong Kong First Division League and the Hong Kong Senior Challenge Shield.
In India, three teams have won the Double of the National Football League (now I-League) / Indian Super League and the Federation Cup (now Super Cup).
In Indonesia only one team has won the Double of the Indonesia Super League / Indonesian Premier League and the Piala Indonesia.
In Iran, two teams have won the Double of the Azadegan League / Iran Pro League and the Hazfi Cup.
In Iraq, four teams have won the Double of the Iraqi Premier League and the Iraq FA Cup.
The Japanese Double is generally considered to be winning the league championship (the Japan Soccer League Division 1 until 1991–92 and the J.League Division 1 since then) and the Emperor's Cup. Winning the second division title and the Emperor's Cup is rarer.
First Division and Emperor's Cup
Second Division and Emperor's Cup
In Jordan, three teams have won the Double of the Jordan Premier League and the Jordan FA Cup.
In North Korea, three teams have won the Double of the DPR Korea League and the DPRK Championships / Hwaebul Cup.
In South Korea, two teams have won the Double of the First Division and the Korean National Football Championship in semi-professional era. In professional era, two teams have won the K League 1 and the FA Cup and three teams have won the Double of the K League 1 and the League Cup.
First Division and National Football Championship
First Division and FA Cup
FA Cup and AFC Champions League (former Asian Club Championship)
In Kyrgyzstan, three teams have won the Double of the Kyrgyzstan League and the Kyrgyzstan Cup.
In Kuwait, three teams have won the Double of the Kuwaiti Premier League and the Kuwait Emir Cup.
In Laos, two teams have won the Double of the Lao Premier League and the Laotian Prime Minister's Cup.
In Lebanon, six teams have won the Double of the Lebanese Premier League and the Lebanese FA Cup.
In Macau, only one team has won the Double of the Campeonato da 1ª Divisão and the Taça de Macau.
In Malaysia, eight teams have won the Double of the Malaysia League / Malaysia Semi-Pro League / Malaysia Premier League / Malaysia Super League and the Malaysia Cup or Malaysia FA Cup.
In Maldives, four teams have won the Double of the Maldives National Championship (1980–1999) / Dhivehi League (2000–present) and the Maldives FA Cup.
In Mongolia, only one team has won the Double of the Niislel League and the Mongolia Cup.
In Myanmar, two teams have won the Double of the Myanmar National League and the General Aung San Shield.
In the Northern Mariana Islands, only one team has won the double of the M*League Division 1 and the Northern Mariana Cup.
In Oman four teams have won the Double of the Omani League and the Sultan Qaboos Cup.
In Pakistan, three teams have won the Double of the Pakistan Premier League and the Pakistan National Football Challenge Cup.
Due to the sporadic nature of football competitions in the country, with a league not in place until the 21st century, and only the United Football League (UFL) to last more than a season, and a national cup competition not being consistently held annually, achieving a double has been mostly impossible until recently. The establishment of the UFL in 2009 led to annual league and cup tournaments. The institution of the PFF National Men's Club Championship (the national cup) in 2011 (next held in 2013) after years of dormancy meant that a domestic treble could now be contested. In 2013, a super cup is expected to be played, paving the way for a UFL treble.
During the existence of the UFL from 2009 to 2016, a league double has been achieved thrice. A domestic double (a title each from the UFL and the PFF) or a domestic treble (a UFL double and a PFF title) has not been won.
In Qatar, three teams have won the Double of the Qatar Stars League and the Emir of Qatar Cup.
In Saudi Arabia, five teams have won the Double of the Saudi Professional League and the King's Cup (1956–1990, 2008–present) / Crown Prince Cup (1990–2007).
In Singapore, four teams have won the Double of the S.League and the Singapore Cup.
In Sri Lanka, three teams have won the Double of the Sri Lanka Football Premier League and the Sri Lanka FA Cup.
In Syria, six teams have won the Double of the Syrian Premier League and the Syrian Cup.
In Tajikistan, six teams have won the Double of the Tajik League and the Tajik Cup.
In Thailand, two teams have won the Double of the Kor Royal Cup (1916–1995)/Thai Premier League (1996–present) and the Thai FA Cup.
In Turkmenistan, three teams have won the Double of the Ýokary Liga and the Turkmenistan Cup.
In the United Arab Emirates, five teams have won the Double of the UAE Arabian Gulf League and the UAE President's Cup.
In Uzbekistan, five teams have won the Double of the Uzbek League and the Uzbekistan Cup.
In Vietnam, four teams have won the Double of the V.League 1 and the Vietnamese National Cup.
In Yemen, four teams have won the Double of the North Yemen Champions/Yemeni League and the Cup of the Republic / Yemeni President Cup.
In Algeria, five teams have won the Double of the Algerian Ligue Professionnelle 1 and the Algerian Cup.
In Angola, three teams have won the Double of the Girabola and the Taça de Angola.
In Benin, two teams have won the Double of the Benin Premier League and the Benin Cup.
In Botswana, seven teams have won the Double of the Botswana Premier League and the FA Challenge Cup.
In Burkina Faso, three teams have won the Double of the Burkinabé Premier League and the Coupe du Faso.
In Burundi, only one team has won the Double of the Burundi Premier League and the Burundian Cup.
In Cameroon five teams have won the Double of the Elite One and the Cameroonian Cup.
In Cape Verde, only one team has won the Double of the Campeonato Nacional de Cabo Verde and the Taça Nacional de Cabo Verde.
In Central African Republic, only one team has won the Double of the CAR League and the CAR Coupe Nationale.
In Chad, no team has won the Double of the Chad Premier League and the Chad Cup.
In Comoros, two teams have won the Double of the Comoros Premier League and the Comoros Cup.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, six teams have won the Double of the Linafoot and the Coupe du Congo.
In the Republic of the Congo, three teams have won the Double of the Congo Premier League and the Coupe du Congo.
In Djibouti, four teams have won the Double of the Djibouti Premier League and the Djibouti Cup.
In Egypt, two teams have won the Double of the Egyptian Premier League and the Egypt Cup.
In Equatorial Guinea, no team has won the Double of the Equatoguinean Premier League and the Equatoguinean Cup.
In Eritrea, no team has won the Double of the Eritrean Premier League and the Eritrean Cup.
In Ethiopia, three teams have won the Double of the Ethiopian Premier League and the Ethiopian Cup.
In Gabon, five teams have won the Double of the Gabon Championnat National D1 and the Coupe du Gabon Interclubs.
In The Gambia, two teams have won the Double of the GFA League First Division and the Gambian Cup.
In Ghana, three teams have won the Double of the Ghana Premier League and the Ghanaian FA Cup.
In Guinea, two teams have won the Double of the Guinée Championnat National and the Guinée Coupe Nationale.
In Guinea-Bissau, three teams have won the Double of the Campeonato Nacional da Guiné-Bissau and the Taça Nacional da Guiné Bissau.
In the Ivory Coast, two teams have won the Double of the Ligue 1 and the Coupe de Côte d'Ivoire.
In Kenya, two teams have won the Double of the Kenyan Premier League and the President's Cup.
In Lesotho, five teams have won the Double of the Lesotho Premier League and the Lesotho Independence Cup.
In Liberia, eight teams have won the Double of the Liberian Premier League and the Liberian Cup.
In Libya, two teams have won the Double of the Libyan Premier League and the Libyan Cup.
In Madagascar, four teams have won the Double of the THB Champions League and the Coupe de Madagascar.
In Malawi, only one team has won the Double of the Malawi Premier Division and the Malawi FAM Cup.
In Mali, three teams have won the Double of the Malian Première Division and the Malian Cup.
In Mauritania, two teams have won the Double of the Ligue 1 Mauritania and the Coupe du Président de la République.
In Mauritius, seven teams have won the Double of the Mauritian League and the Mauritian Cup.
In Morocco, three teams have won the Double of the Botola and the Coupe du Trône.
In Mozambique, five teams have won the Double of the Moçambola and the Taça de Moçambique.
In Namibia, only one team has won the Double of the Namibia Premier League and the NFA Cup.
In Niger, eight teams have won the Double of the Niger Premier League and the Niger Cup.
In Nigeria, seven teams have won the Double of the Nigeria Premier League and the Nigerian FA Cup.
In Rwanda, three teams have won the Double of the Primus National Football League and the Rwandan Cup.
In São Tomé and Príncipe, six teams have won the Double of the São Tomé and Príncipe Championship and the Taça Nacional de São Tomé e Príncipe.
In Senegal, three teams have won the Double of the Senegal Premier League and the Senegal FA Cup.
In Seychelles, two teams have won the Double of the Seychelles First Division and the Seychelles FA Cup.
In Sierra Leone, two teams have won the Double of the Sierra Leone National Premier League and the Sierra Leonean FA Cup.
In Somalia, no team has won the Double of the Somalia League and the Somalia Cup.
In South Africa, 13 teams have won the Double of the NFL / SASL / FPL / NPSL / NSL / South African Premier Division and the NFL Cup / SASF Cup / Nedbank Cup.
In South Sudan, only one team has won the Double of the South Sudan Football Championship and the South Sudan National Cup.
In Sudan, two teams have won the Double of the Sudan Premier League and the Sudan Cup.
In Swaziland, two teams have won the Double of the Swazi Premier League and the Swazi Cup.
In Tanzania, three teams have won the Double of the Tanzanian Premier League and the Nyerere Cup/Tanzania FA Cup.
In Togo, five teams have won the Double of the Togolese Championnat National and the Coupe du Togo.
In Tunisia, ten teams have won the Double of the Tunisian Ligue Professionnelle 1 and the Tunisian Cup.
In Uganda, three teams have won the Double of the Ugandan Super League and the Ugandan Cup.
In Zambia, six teams have won the Double of the Zambian Premier League and the Zambian Cup (defunct).
In Zimbabwe, six teams have won the Double of the Zimbabwe Premier Soccer League and the Cup of Zimbabwe.
The Greenlandic Football Championship is the only national football competition in the country.
In Kiribati, there is no national cup; the Kiribati National Championship is the only national football competition in the country.
In Northern Cyprus, five teams have won the Double of the Birinci Lig and the Kıbrıs Kupası/Federasyon Kupası.
In Réunion, four teams have won the Double of the Réunion Premier League and the Coupe de la Réunion.
In Zanzibar, only one team has won the Double of the Zanzibar Premier League and the Nyerere Cup.
A rarer (though less coveted) domestic double is that of winning the league championship and the League Cup. In many leagues, this cannot be done as there is no second domestic cup competition (such as in Italy and the Netherlands) or it has been disbanded (such as in Spain and Denmark). The format of league cups and the number of participating teams can vary enormously from one country to another. In the case of Germany, the DFB-Ligapokal was played in the summer months prior to the Bundesliga and therefore was won in the preceding calendar year to the title win.
In many countries, knock-out competitions exclusive to clubs outside the top division(s) also exist. This gives lower ranked clubs a chance to win a double. Examples include:
A very rare event. A Trans-state double occurs when a club wins a league and a cup which technically belong to two different countries and different associations. This usually happens as a result of a change in the political situation in the club's home country, or if the club has expatriated and is eligible to participate in the competitions of its native country and its adopted one.
In the same spirit as the European treble, the European double consists of winning the top tier European tournament (currently the UEFA Champions League) and domestic league title in a single season or calendar year. This has been achieved on 29 occasions by 15 clubs from 56 European competitions. Barcelona has achieved this on the most number of occasions (5). Ajax and Real Madrid are the only teams that have successfully defended a European double. José Mourinho has the unique distinction of being the only manager to achieve this double with two different clubs, having done so with Porto (2004) and Internazionale (2010).
(*) as part of a trebleIn 1994–95, Louis van Gaal's Ajax, with players such as Jari Litmanen, Patrick Kluivert, Marc Overmars, Finidi George, Nwankwo Kanu, Frank de Boer, Ronald de Boer, Edgar Davids, Clarence Seedorf, Winston Bogarde, Michael Reiziger and Edwin van der Sar, succeeded an unbeaten double, winning the Dutch Eredivisie with a 27–7–0 record and the UEFA Champions League with a 7–4–0 record. Van Gaal's dream team was the only club to achieve a European double with no defeats.
The UEFA Europa League (formerly the UEFA Cup), with a domestic league title win, offers the chance for a club to win a lesser European double; but arguably a more prestigious achievement than a domestic double. This has been completed on fourteen occasions.
  In 1987, Göteborg finished third in the Allsvenskan. At this time, the title was decided by a play-off between the top four teams. They defeated first placed Malmö FF in the play-off final.
Similarly, there were six occasions of clubs winning their League and the now defunct UEFA Cup Winners' Cup (CWC). No club ever won the CWC as part of a recognised treble. In the case of 1. FC Magdeburg and Dynamo Kyiv, it is also worth noting that the domestic championships they won are also now disbanded, due to German reunification and the dissolution of the Soviet Union respectively.
Outside Europe, the continental double might be won in a calendar year rather than a single season.
There are various possible combinations of winning two knock-out competitions.
A Domestic cup double consists of winning both domestic cup competitions in a single season or calendar year (for seasons when this double was won in conjunction with the league title, see domestic treble). Examples include:
There have been several occasions when a club has won its association's cup or league cup and a UEFA trophy but not its League title. For European cup doubles won in conjunction with the league title, see the treble.
  A unique cup treble.
A combination of domestic league or cup and a lesser domestic or continental trophy may be won in the same season. Examples include (this list does not include doubles achieved as part of a treble):
Barcelona's 1960 team won both La Liga and the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup.
Zaragoza won an Inter-Cities Fairs Cup and Copa del Rey double in the 1963–64 season.
Leeds United were the first English team to win a double involving European and domestic trophies. It was in 1968 when Leeds won the Football League Cup and Inter-Cities Fairs Cup.
Chicago Fire won the Supporters' Shield and U.S. Open Cup in 2003.
Dinamo Tbilisi won the Georgian Cup and CIS Cup in 2004.
Espanyol won the Copa del Rey and Copa Catalunya in 2006. This would not normally be counted as a domestic cup double comparable to those mentioned above, as the latter competition is not nationwide or league-wide.
Copenhagen won the Danish Superliga and the pan-Scandinavian Royal League in 2006.
FBK Kaunas won the Lithuanian Football Cup and Baltic League in 2008.
Al-Quwa Al-Jawiya won the Iraq FA Cup and AFC Cup in 2016.
Al-Quwa Al-Jawiya won the Iraqi Premier League and AFC Cup in 2017.
Mumbai City FC won the ISL Championship and ISL Premiership in 2020-21 seasonA national team cannot usually win a FIFA World Cup and their continental championship in the same year because they are usually not held in the same year (except for the Africa Cup of Nations until 2010), but one which wins both titles consecutively could be said to have "done the double".
 Uruguay won the gold medal at the 1924 Summer Olympics and the 1924 South American Championship. (Prior to the FIFA World Cup's foundation in 1930, the Olympic champions were considered to be the world champions).
 West Germany won UEFA Euro 1972 and the 1974 FIFA World Cup
 France won the 1998 FIFA World Cup, UEFA Euro 2000 and the 2001 FIFA Confederations Cup
 Brazil won the 2002 FIFA World Cup, the 2004 Copa América and the 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup
 Spain won UEFA Euro 2008, the 2010 FIFA World Cup and UEFA Euro 2012 Italy won the 1933–35 Central European International Cup and the 1934 FIFA World Cup
 Brazil won the 1956 Panamerican Championship and the 1958 FIFA World Cup
 England won the 1965–66 British Home Championship and the 1966 FIFA World Cup
 Germany won the 2014 FIFA World Cup and the 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup
 France won the 2018 FIFA World Cup and the 2020–21 UEFA Nations League Iran won the 1970 RCD Cup and the 1972 AFC Asian Cup
 Ghana won the 1982 African Cup of Nations, 1982 West African Nations Cup and 1983 West African Nations Cup
 Ivory Coast won the 1991 CEDEAO Cup and the 1992 African Cup of Nations
 Argentina won the 1991 Copa América, the 1992 King Fahd Cup and the 1993 Copa América
 Saudi Arabia won the 1996 AFC Asian Cup and the 1998 Arab Nations Cup
 Brazil won the 1997 Copa América and the 1997 FIFA Confederations Cup
 Mexico won the 1998 CONCACAF Gold Cup and the 1999 FIFA Confederations Cup
 Cameroon won the 2000 African Cup of Nations, the 2002 African Cup of Nations and the 2003 CEMAC Cup
 Iraq won the 2005 West Asian Games and the 2007 AFC Asian Cup
 Brazil won the 2007 Copa América and the 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup
 Japan won the 2011 AFC Asian Cup and the 2013 EAFF East Asian Cup
 Portugal won UEFA Euro 2016 and the 2018–19 UEFA Nations League
 Senegal won the 2019 WAFU Cup of Nations and the 2021 Africa Cup of Nations
 United States won the 2019–20 CONCACAF Nations League and the 2021 CONCACAF Gold CupAs manager of Preston North End in 1888–89, William Sudell won the inaugural First Division title, going unbeaten in the league (22 games), and won the FA Cup without conceding a goal in that competition.
Jock Stein won the double on nine occasions with Celtic between 1967 and 1977: four doubles of the Scottish league championship and the Scottish Cup, three doubles of the Scottish league championship and the Scottish League Cup and two Trebles.
Sir Alex Ferguson won the double on four occasions; with Aberdeen in 1983–84, and with Manchester United in 1993–94, 1995–96 and 1998–99. This achievement makes him the only manager to win the double on both sides of the Anglo-Scottish border.
Sven-Göran Eriksson is the only manager to win a domestic double in three different countries, having done so in Sweden, Portugal and Italy with IFK Göteborg (1981–82), Benfica (1982–83) and Lazio (1999–2000) respectively. This included back-to-back double wins in separate countries.
Louis van Gaal won the double with Barcelona in 1997–98 and Bayern Munich in 2009–10, subsequent to his undefeated European Double with Ajax in 1994–95.
Massimiliano Allegri became the first manager in Italy to win the double four consecutive times, in 2014–15, 2015–16, 2016–17 and 2017–18, all with Juventus.The Treble
List of association football teams to have won four or more trophies in one season