Policy Impact Assessments (IAs) are formal, evidence-based procedures that assess the economic, social, and environmental effects of public policy. They have been incorporated into policy making in the OECD countries and the European Commission.
Key types of impact assessments include global assessments (global level), policy impact assessment (policy level), strategic environmental assessment (programme and plan level), and environmental impact assessment (project level). Impact assessments can focus on specific themes, such as social impact assessments and gender impact assessments.
IAs can improve legislation by:
Informing policy makers about potential economic, social, and environmental ramifications
Improving transparency so that contributions to sustainability and "better regulation" are disclosed and special interest lobbying is discouraged
Increasing public participation in order to reflect a range of considerations, thereby improving the legitimacy of policies
Clarifying how public policy helps achieve its goals and priorities through policy indicators
Contributing to continuous learning in policy development by identifying causalities that inform ex-post review of policiesThe department which is responsible for the policy proposal usually has to carry out the IA. Although the purpose and orientation of IA procedures differ, IA guidelines in the various jurisdictions all follow a similar set of steps to be followed by desk officers:
Planning of the IA
Carrying out the impact analysis
Consultation of affected stakeholders and the general public
Coordination with affected departments
Summary and presentation of findings in a report
Forwarding findings to decision makers
Publication of the IA report (not in all countries)The analytical steps, which mainly relate to step 2, can be set out as
i.	Problem definition
ii.	Definition of policy objectives
iii.	Development of policy options
iv.	Analysis of impacts
v.	Comparison of policy options and recommendation of one option
vi.	Defining monitoring measures.
Throughout the IA process, methods can be used for support. In recent years governments have increasingly invested in developing and applying methods and tools for IA.
Depending on usage, IA methods can be classified as methods for
Scoping (e.g., checklists)
For qualitative analysis (e.g., focus groups)
For quantitative analysis (e.g., life-cycle assessment, material flow accounting, modelling)
Aggregation and comparison of options (e.g., cost–benefit analysis)
Analysing coherence (e.g., Gender IA)
Supporting participation and involvement (e.g., internet consultation)
Data presentation and involvement (e.g., GIS)
Monitoring and evaluation (e.g., indicators)Impact evaluation
Outcomes theory
Participatory impact pathways analysis
Policy analysis
Policy studies
Program evaluationInternational Association for Impact Assessment (main source)
Impact Assessment and Project Appraisal (a journal)
Impact Assessment Page at the European Commission
IAIA Wiki