A National Olympic Committee (NOC) is a national constituent of the worldwide Olympic movement. Subject to the controls of the International Olympic Committee, NOCs are responsible for organizing their people's participation in the Olympic Games.  They may nominate cities within their respective areas as candidates for future Olympic Games. NOCs also promote the development of athletes and training of coaches and officials at a national level within their geographies.
As of 2020, there are 206 National Olympic Committees. These include each of the 193 member states of the United Nations, one UN observer state (Palestine) and two states with limited recognition (Kosovo and Taiwan).
There are also ten dependent territories with recognized NOCs: four territories of the United States (American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the United States Virgin Islands), three British Overseas Territories (Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, and the Cayman Islands), one constituent country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands (Aruba), one associated state of New Zealand (the Cook Islands) and one special administrative region of China (Hong Kong).
Prior to 1996, rules for recognising dependent territories or constituent countries as separate countries within the IOC were not as strict as those within the United Nations, which allowed these territories to field teams separately from their sovereign state. Following an amendment to the Olympic Charter in 1996, NOC recognition can only be granted after recognition as an independent country by the international community. Since the rule does not apply retroactively, the dependent territories and constituent countries which were recognised before the rule change are allowed to continue sending separate teams to the Olympics, while the Faroe Islands and Macau send their own Paralympic teams.
The only state which thus qualifies to participate in the future is the Vatican City, a UN observer state. Niue, another associated state of New Zealand, could also be eligible for participation in the future as it conducts its own foreign relations and participates in several UN specialized agencies like other sovereign states. Currently, all other remaining states are ineligible to join the IOC as they are not recognised by a majority of the United Nations member countries. Constituent countries and dependent territories such as Curaçao, the Faroe Islands, Gibraltar, Macau and New Caledonia can also no longer be recognised, so athletes from these territories can only participate in the Olympics as part of their parent nation's national team. This rule also applies to territories experiencing a change in status – the Netherlands Antilles Olympic Committee was dissolved at the 123rd IOC session in July 2011 as the Netherlands Antilles ceased to exist in 2010.
For those countries and territories that are part of the Commonwealth of Nations, their National Olympic Committees also serve as the members of the Commonwealth Games Association. They are responsible for organising and overseeing their national teams at the Commonwealth Games.
This section lists the current:
206 National Olympic Committees who are recognised by the International Olympic Committee, and so are the members of the Association of National Olympic Committees.
7 National Olympic Committees who are recognised by their continental Olympic associations, but are not recognised by the International Olympic Committee (Italics).The ANOC members are eligible to enter the Olympic Games. Some National Olympic Committees who are members of a continental Olympic association but not ANOC members compete in continental-level and subregional-level tournaments. These committees, however, are not allowed to participate in the Olympic Games.
The five continental Olympic associations are:
Africa – Association of National Olympic Committees of Africa (ANOCA)
America – Pan American Sports Organization (PASO)
Asia – Olympic Council of Asia (OCA)
Europe – European Olympic Committees (EOC)
Oceania – Oceania National Olympic Committees (ONOC)The IOC runs the Summer Olympic Games and the Winter Olympic Games as competitions in which all IOC-recognised NOCs can participate. Each continent also runs its own championships for their members:
ANOCA – African Games
PASO – Pan American Games and Pan American Winter Games
OCA – Asian Games and Asian Winter Games
EOC – European Games
ONOC – Pacific GamesWhile not continental unions in themselves, the Union of Arab National Olympic Committees (UANOC) and International Committee of Mediterranean Games (CIJM) organise multi-sport events between Arabic-speaking countries and Mediterranean countries respectively. All 22 National Olympic Committees that form the UANOC and the 26 from CIJM are also members of either the ANOCA, EOC or OCA and are eligible to send their athletes to either the African, European or Asian Games. National Olympic Committees from the UANOC and CIJM are noted in the list below.



 Algeria 
 Angola
 Benin
 Botswana
 Burkina Faso
 Burundi
 Cameroon
 Cape Verde
 Central African Republic
 Chad
 Comoros
 Congo
 DR Congo


 Djibouti
 Egypt
 Equatorial Guinea
 Eritrea
 Eswatini
 Ethiopia
 Gabon
 Gambia
 Ghana
 Guinea
 Guinea-Bissau
 Ivory Coast
 Kenya
 Lesotho


 Liberia
 Libya
 Madagascar
 Malawi
 Mali
 Mauritania
 Mauritius
 Morocco
 Mozambique
 Namibia
 Niger
 Nigeria
 Rwanda
 São Tomé and Príncipe


 Senegal
 Seychelles
 Sierra Leone
 Somalia
 South Africa
 South Sudan
 Sudan
 Tanzania
 Togo
 Tunisia
 Uganda
 Zambia
 Zimbabwe

1: National Olympic Committee is a member of the UANOC.
2: National Olympic Committee is a member of the CIJM.




 Antigua and Barbuda
 Argentina
 Aruba
 Bahamas
 Barbados
 Belize
 Bermuda
 Bolivia
 Brazil
 British Virgin Islands
 Canada


 Cayman Islands
 Chile
 Colombia
 Costa Rica
 Cuba
 Dominica
 Dominican Republic
 Ecuador
 El Salvador
 Grenada
 Guatemala


 Guyana
 Haiti
 Honduras
 Jamaica
 Mexico
 Nicaragua
 Panama
 Paraguay
 Peru
 Puerto Rico
 Saint Kitts and Nevis


 Saint Lucia
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
 Suriname
 Trinidad and Tobago
 United States
 Uruguay
 Venezuela
 Virgin Islands, US



 Afghanistan
 Bahrain
 Bangladesh
 Bhutan
 Brunei
 Cambodia
 China
 Hong Kong, China
 India
 Indonesia
 Iran
 Iraq


 Japan
 Jordan
 Kazakhstan
 DPR Korea
 Republic of Korea
 Kuwait
 Kyrgyzstan
 Laos
 Lebanon
 Macau, China
 Malaysia
 Maldives


 Mongolia
 Myanmar
 Nepal
 Oman
 Pakistan
 Palestine
 Philippines
 Qatar
 Saudi Arabia
 Singapore
 Sri Lanka
 Syria


 Chinese Taipei
 Tajikistan
 Thailand
 Timor-Leste
 Turkmenistan
 United Arab Emirates
 Uzbekistan
 Vietnam
 Yemen

1: National Olympic Committee is a member of the UANOC.
2: National Olympic Committee is a member of the OCA but not an ANOC member.
3: Official name used by the IOC, ANOC and OCA for the  Republic of China (Taiwan).
4: National Olympic Committee is a member of the CIJM.




 Albania
 Andorra
 Armenia
 Austria
 Azerbaijan
 Belarus
 Belgium
 Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Bulgaria
 Croatia
 Cyprus
 Czech Republic
 Denmark


 Estonia
 Finland
 France
 Georgia
 Germany
 Great Britain
 Greece
 Hungary
 Iceland
 Ireland
 Israel
 Italy
 Kosovo


 Latvia
 Liechtenstein
 Lithuania
 Luxembourg
 Malta
 Republic of Moldova
 Monaco 
 Montenegro 
 Netherlands
 North Macedonia 
 Norway
 Poland
 Portugal 


 Romania
 Russian Federation
 San Marino 
 Serbia 
 Slovakia
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden
 Switzerland
 Turkey 
 Ukraine

1: Israel was a member of the OCA, but left the organisation in 1981. It joined the EOC in 1994.
2: National Olympic Committee is a member of the CIJM.




 American Samoa
 Australia
 Cook Islands
 Fiji
 Guam
 Kiribati


 Marshall Islands
 FS Micronesia
 Nauru
 New Caledonia
 New Zealand
 Niue


 Norfolk Island
 Northern Mariana Islands
 Palau
 Papua New Guinea
 Samoa
 Solomon Islands


 French Polynesia
 Tonga
 Tuvalu
 Vanuatu
 Wallis and Futuna

1: National Olympic Committee is an associate member of the ONOC but not an ANOC member.

The NOCs are all members of the Association of National Olympic Committees (ANOC), which is also split among five continental associations:
See the article for each continental association for the complete lists of all NOCs.
The Faroe Islands and Macau both have recognized National Paralympic Committees and compete at the Paralympic Games. However, neither territory's National Olympic Committee is recognized by the IOC, so they cannot participate in the Olympics. Macau remains recognized by the Olympic Council of Asia and takes part in the Asian Games.
Other existing countries/regions with unrecognized Olympic committees: Catalonia, Gibraltar, French Polynesia, Niue, Somaliland, New Caledonia, Kurdistan, Northern Cyprus, Abkhazia, Native Americans, the Northern Mariana Islands, Anguilla, Montserrat, Transnistria and Turks & Caicos Islands.
South Ossetia intends to establish a National Olympic Committee, and representatives from the Republic of Artsakh take part in Armenia's National Olympic Committee.
National Paralympic Committee
List of IOC country codes
District of Columbia Olympic Committee
Commonwealth Games Association Media related to National Olympic Committees at Wikimedia Commons
Official website