European cuisine comprises the cuisines of Europe including the cuisines brought to other countries by European settlers and colonists. Sometimes the term "European", or more specifically "continental" cuisine, is used to refer more strictly to the cuisine of the western parts of mainland Europe.
The cuisines of Western countries are diverse, although there are common characteristics that distinguish them from those of other regions. Compared with traditional cooking of East Asia, meat is more prominent and substantial in serving size. Steak and cutlets in particular are common dishes across the West. Western cuisines also emphasize grape wine and sauces as condiments, seasonings, or accompaniments (in part due to the difficulty of seasonings penetrating the often larger pieces of meat used in Western cooking). Many dairy products are utilised in cooking. There are hundreds of varieties of cheese and other fermented milk products. White wheat-flour bread has long been the prestige starch, but historically, most people ate bread, flatcakes, or porridge made from rye, spelt, barley, and oats. Those better-off would also make pasta, dumplings and pastries. The potato has become a major starch plant in the diet of Europeans and their diaspora since the European colonisation of the Americas. Maize is much less common in most European diets than it is in the Americas; however, corn meal (polenta or mămăligă) is a major part of the cuisine of Italy and the Balkans. Although flatbreads (especially with toppings such as pizza or tarte flambée) and rice are eaten in Europe, they are only staple foods in limited areas, particularly in Southern Europe.  Salads (cold dishes with uncooked or cooked vegetables, sometimes with a dressing) are an integral part of European cuisine.
Formal European dinners are served in distinct courses. European presentation evolved from service à la française, or bringing multiple dishes to the table at once, into service à la russe, where dishes are presented sequentially. Usually, cold, hot and savoury, and sweet dishes are served strictly separately in this order, as hors d'oeuvre (appetizer) or soup, as entrée and main course, and as dessert. Dishes that are both sweet and savoury were common earlier in Ancient Roman cuisine, but are today uncommon, with sweet dishes being served only as dessert. A service where the guests are free to take food by themselves is termed a buffet, and is usually restricted to parties or holidays. Nevertheless, guests are expected to follow the same pattern.
Historically, European cuisine has been developed in the European royal and noble courts. European nobility was usually arms-bearing and lived in separate manors in the countryside. The knife was the primary eating implement (cutlery), and eating steaks and other foods that require cutting followed. This contrasted with East Asian cuisine, where the ruling class were the court officials, who had their food prepared ready to eat in the kitchen, to be eaten with chopsticks. The knife was supplanted by the spoon for soups, while the fork was introduced later in the early modern period, ca. 16th century. Today, most dishes are intended to be eaten with cutlery and only a few finger foods can be eaten with the hands in polite company.
In medieval times, a person's diet varied depending on their social class. Cereal grains made up a lot of a medieval person's diet, regardless of social class. Bread was common to both classes- it was taken as a lunch for the working man, and thick slices of it were used as plates called trenchers. People of the noble class had access to finely ground flours for their breads and other baked goods. Noblemen were allowed to hunt for deer, boar, rabbits, birds, and other animals, giving them access to fresh meat and fish for their meals. Dishes for people of these classes were often heavily spiced. Spices at that time were very expensive, and the more spices used in dishes, the more wealth the person had to be able to purchase such ingredients. Common spices used were cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, pepper, cumin, cloves, turmeric, anise, and saffron. Other ingredients used in dishes for the nobility and clergy included sugar, almonds and dried fruits like raisins. These imported ingredients would have been very expensive and nearly impossible for commoners to obtain. When banquets were held, the dishes served would be very spectacular- another way for the noblemen to show how rich they were. Sugar sculptures would be placed on the tables as decoration and to eat, and foods would be dyed vibrant colors with imported spices.
The diet of a commoner would have been much more simple. Strict poaching laws prevented them from hunting, and if they did hunt and were caught, they could have parts of their limbs cut off or they could be killed. Much of the commoners food would have been preserved in some way, such as through pickling or by being salted. Breads would have been made using rye or barley, and any vegetables would likely have been grown by the commoners themselves. Peasants would have likely been able to keep cows, and so would have access to milk, which then allowed them to make butter or cheese. When meat was eaten, it would have been beef, pork, or lamb. Commoners also ate a dish called pottage, a thick stew of vegetables, grains, and meat.
In the early modern era, European cuisine saw an influx of new ingredients due to the Columbian Exchange, such as the potato, tomato, eggplant, chocolate, bell pepper, pumpkins, and other squash. Distilled spirits, along with tea, coffee, and chocolate were all popularized during this time. In the 1780s, the idea of the modern restaurant was introduced in Paris; the French Revolution accelerated its development, quickly spreading around Europe.
All of these countries have their specialities. Austria is famous for Wiener Schnitzel - a breaded veal cutlet served with a slice of lemon, the Czech Republic for world renowned beers. Germany for world-famous wursts, Hungary for goulash. Slovakia is famous for gnocchi-like Halusky pasta. Slovenia is known for German and Italian influenced cuisine, Poland for world-famous Pierogis which are a cross between a ravioli and an empanada. Liechtenstein and German speaking Switzerland are famous for Rösti and French speaking Switzerland for fondue and Raclettes.
Ashkenazi Jewish cuisine
 Austrian cuisine
 Viennese cuisine
 Czech cuisine
 Moravian cuisine
 German cuisine
Baden cuisine
 Bavarian cuisine
 Brandenburg cuisine
 Franconian cuisine
 Hamburg cuisine
 Hessian cuisine
 Lower Saxon cuisine
 Mecklenburg cuisine
Palatine cuisine
Pomeranian cuisine
 Saxon cuisine
Ore Mountain cuisine
 Schleswig-Holstein cuisine
Swabian cuisine
 Hungarian cuisine
 Polish cuisine
 Lublin cuisine
 Podlaskie cuisine
 Świętokrzyskie cuisine
 Liechtensteiner cuisine
 Silesian cuisine
 Slovak cuisine
 Slovenian cuisine
 Swiss cuisine Armenian cuisine
 Azerbaijani cuisine
 Belarusian cuisine
 Bulgarian cuisine
 Georgian cuisine
 Kazakh cuisine
 Moldovan cuisine
 Gagauz cuisine
  Ossetian cuisine
 Romanian cuisine
 Russian cuisine
 Bashkir cuisine
 Komi cuisine
 Mordovian cuisine
 North Caucasian cuisine
 Chechen cuisine
 Circassian cuisine
 Tatar cuisine
 Udmurt cuisine
Yamal cuisine
 Ukrainian cuisine
 Crimean Tatar cuisine
 Odessite cuisine Danish cuisine
 Faroese cuisine
New Nordic Cuisine
 Estonian cuisine
 Finnish cuisine
 Icelandic cuisine
 Latvian cuisine
 Lithuanian cuisine
 Livonian cuisine
 Norwegian cuisine
 Sami cuisine
 Swedish cuisine Albanian cuisine
 Kosovan cuisine
 Aromanian cuisine
 Bosnian cuisine
 Croatian cuisine
 Cypriot cuisine
 Gibraltarian cuisine
 Greek cuisine
Ancient Greek cuisine
 Byzantine cuisine
 Cretan cuisine
Epirotic cuisine
 Greek Macedonian cuisine
 Ionian cuisine
 Italian cuisine
 Abruzzian cuisine 
Ancient Roman cuisine
 Apulian cuisine
Arbëreshë cuisine
 Ligurian cuisine
 Lombard cuisine
 Mantuan cuisine
 Lucanian cuisine
 Neapolitan cuisine
 Roman cuisine
 Sardinian cuisine
 Sicilian cuisine
 Venetian cuisine
 Macedonian cuisine
 Maltese cuisine
 Montenegrin cuisine
 Ottoman cuisine
 Portuguese cuisine
 Sammarinese cuisine
Sephardic Jewish cuisine
 Serbian cuisine
 Spanish cuisine
 Andalusian cuisine
 Aragonese cuisine
 Asturian cuisine
 Balearic cuisine
 Menorcan cuisine
 Basque cuisine
 Canarian cuisine
 Cantabrian cuisine
 Castilian-Leonese cuisine
 Vallisoletano cuisine
 Catalan cuisine
 Castilian-Manchego cuisine
 Extremaduran cuisine
 Galician cuisine
 Madrilenian cuisine
 Valencian cuisine
 Turkish cuisine Belgian cuisine
 British cuisine
  Channel Islands cuisine
 English cuisine
 Cornish cuisine
 Devonian cuisine
 Dorset cuisine
Victorian cuisine
Northern Irish cuisine
 Scottish cuisine
 Welsh cuisine
Cuisine of Carmarthenshire
Cuisine of Ceredigion
Cuisine of Gower
Cuisine of Monmouthshire
Cuisine of Pembrokeshire
 Dutch cuisine
 French cuisine
 Corsican cuisine
Haute cuisine
Cuisine classique
Nouvelle cuisine
 Lyonnaise cuisine
 Irish cuisine
 Luxembourgian cuisine
Mennonite cuisine
 Monégasque cuisine
 Occitan cuisineEarly modern European cuisine
Medieval cuisine
Jewish cuisine
Romani cuisine
Soviet cuisineAlbala, Ken (2003). Food in Early Modern Europe. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0313319626. Retrieved 6 June 2017.
R & R Publishing (2005). European Cuisine: The Best in European Food. Cpg Incorporated. ISBN 1740225279. Retrieved 6 June 2017.