A guest house (also guesthouse) is a kind of lodging.  In some parts of the world (such as the Caribbean), guest houses are a type of inexpensive hotel-like lodging. In still others, it is a private home that has been converted for the exclusive use of lodging. The owner usually lives in an entirely separate area within the property and the guest house may serve as a form of lodging business. This type of accommodation presents some benefits such as: 
Personalized attention
Healthy and homemade food
Quietness
InexpensivenessIn some areas of the world, guest houses are the only kind of accommodation available for visitors who have no local relatives to stay with. Among the features which distinguish a guest house from a hotel, or inn is the lack of a full-time staff.
Bed and breakfasts and guest houses in England are family owned and the family lives on the premises though family members are not normally available during the evening. However, most family members work a 10- to 12-hour day from 6 am as they may employ part-time service staff. Hotels maintain a staff presence 24 hours a day and 7 days a week, whereas a guest house has a more limited staff presence. Because of limited staff presence, check-in at a guest house is often by appointment. An inn also usually has a restaurant attached.
In India, a tremendous growth can be seen in the guest house business especially in Delhi-NCR (national capital region) where progress in the IT sector and Commonwealth Games 2010 were two most influential factor. Nowadays the guest house accommodation sector has improved itself a lot. Even a home converted guest house is also offering 3 stars equivalent facilities to its guests.
People living in a paying guest house can be from different states and cultures so one who lives in PG accommodation often choose these good points so that their life becomes easy and comfortable.
Sharing and adjustments
Acknowledging the small matters
Exchanging of contact numbers
Keeping focus on the study
Using of eye band and ear plugs
Participating in a get-together
Safety checkGenerally, there are two variations of paying guest house:
Home converted guest house
Professionally run guest house with all necessary amenities and staffIn the first version of the guest house the guest probably has to live with a family where they get shelter and food (bed and breakfast) only and for the rest of the jobs like washing clothes and utensils, cleaning of room or area around their bed is to be done by the guest. In the second version, the guest receives the all necessary amenities which are required to live life comfortably like a fully furnished room, comfortable bed, air-conditioner, TV, hot and cold water supply, and also one important aspect, security.
A big plus point of a professionally run paying guest accommodation service is that the owner follows the safety norms set by their local government. Some of the important safety points are:
Fire safety with regular fire drills
Disaster management
Updated safety equipment
Information signboards for guests and staff
Government certificationsDharamshala (type of building)
Hotel
Ryokan
Secondary suite Media related to Guest houses at Wikimedia Commons
 Holiday villas travel guide from Wikivoyage
 The dictionary definition of guest house at Wiktionary