The Baldwin Hills are a low mountain range surrounded by and rising above the Los Angeles Basin plain in central Los Angeles County, California.  The Pacific Ocean is to the west, the Santa Monica Mountains to the north, Downtown Los Angeles to the northeast, and the Palos Verdes Hills to the south - with all easily viewed from the Baldwin Hills.
The headwaters of the urban river known as Ballona Creek are in the Santa Monica Mountains, such as above Beverly Hills and flows along the north base of Baldwin Hills through an active geological watergap, on the way to the Pacific Ocean in Santa Monica Bay. La Cienega Boulevard goes through a pass in the ridge of the Baldwin Hills between Inglewood and Culver City, and northeast of Los Angeles International Airport. La Cienega Boulevard is a parkway road passing alongside open space of large private corporate lands with oil wells of the Inglewood Oil Field in the southern Baldwin Hills.
Rancho La Cienega o Paso de la Tijera - eastern area
Sanchez Adobe de Rancho La Cienega o Paso de la Tijera.  The adobe was once the center of the rancho. In the 1920s, an addition was built linking the structures and the building was converted into a larger clubhouse for the Sunset Golf Course.
Rancho Rincon de los Bueyes - western area
The hills are the location of the Baldwin Hills Dam failure and subsequent 1963 Baldwin Hills Reservoir flooding disaster.The Baldwin Hills Parklands are 480 acres (190 ha) of public parks managed by California State Parks, Los Angeles County Parks and Recreation, City of Los Angeles Parks and Recreation, Culver City Parks and Recreation, and the California Mountains Recreation and Conservation Authority.
Kenneth Hahn State Recreation Area - recreation, such as walking, picnicking, and birdwatching fits in with preservation of the open-space lands and native habitats: entrance on South La Cienega Boulevard.
official Baldwin Hills Scenic Overlook Park website - entrance on Jefferson Boulevard; trail map
Norman O Houston Park website
Jim Gilliam Recreation Center websitePark to Playa Trail
Stocker Corridor
Kenneth Hahn State Recreation Area
Blair Hills – Segment C
Baldwin Hills Scenic Overlook
Culver City Park
Ballona Creek Bike Path
Stoneview Nature Center
Norman O. Houston Park
Reuben Ingold ParkInglewood Oil Field
Baldwin Hills
Village Green
Blair Hills, Culver City
Culver Crest
Fox Hills, Culver City
Ladera Heights
Leimert Park
Ranchos of California
View Park-Windsor Hills
West Los Angeles CollegeOfficial Kenneth Hahn State Recreation Area website
The Baldwin Hills Conservancy
Baldwin Hills dam history